---
title: An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States
permalink: /dunbar-ortiz-2014/
sitemap: false
---

# [An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Indigenous_Peoples%27_History_of_the_United_States)
* Author: [Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roxanne_Dunbar-Ortiz)
* Publication Date: 2014

-------

## Table of Contents
* **Introduction**: This Land p. 1
* **Chapter 1**: Follow the Corn p. 15
* **Chapter 2**: Culture of Conquest p. 32
* **Chapter 3**: Cult of the Covenant p. 45
* **Chapter 4**: Bloody Footprints p. 56
* **Chapter 5**: The Birth of a Nation p. 78
* **Chapter 6**: The Last of the Mohicans and Andrew Jackson's White Republic p. 95
* **Chapter 7**: Sea to Shining Sea p. 117
* **Chapter 8**: "Indian Country" p. 133
* **Chapter 9**:  US Triumphalism and Peacetime Colonialism p. 162
* **Chapter 10**:  Ghost Dance Prophecy: A Nation is Coming p. 178
* **Chapter 11**:  The Doctrine of Discovery p. 197
* **Conclusion**: The Future of the United States p. 218

-------

## Introduction: This Land p. 1
* David Chang: 'Nation, race, and class converged in land.' p. 1
* Patrick Wolfe: 'The question of genocide is  never far from discussion of settler colonialism. Land is life–or, at least, land is necessary for life.' p. 2
* "The history of the United States is a history of settler colonialism–the founding of a state based on the ideology of white supremacy, the widespread practice of African slavery, and a policy of genocide and land theft."
* "Traditionally, historians of the US hoping to have successful careers in academia and to author lucrative textbooks become protectors of this [*Columbian* - poetic Latinate name of the 19th century origin myth from the founding onward] origin myth. With the upheavals in the academic world during the 1960s, engendered by the civil rights movement and student activism, historians came to call for objectivity and fairness in revising interpretations of US history.
* "The warned against moralizing, urging instead a dispassionate and culturally relative approach. 
* Historian Bernard Sheehan, in an influential essay, called for a 'cultural conflict' understanding of Native-Euro-American relations in the early United States, writing that this approach 'diffuses the locus of guilt'. In striving for 'balance', however, historians spouted platitudes: 'There were good and bad people on both sides'. 'American culture is an amalgamation of all its ethnic groups'. 'A frontier is a zone of interaction between cultures, not merely advancing European settlements.'" p. 4
* "Later, trendy postmodernist studies insisted on Indigenous 'agency' under the guise of individual and collective empowerment, making the casualties of colonialism responsible for their own demise. Perhaps worst of all, some claimed (and still claim) that the colonizer and colonized experienced an 'encounter' and engaged in 'dialogue', thereby masking reality with justifications and rationalizations–in short, apologies for one-sided robbery and murder. In focusing on 'cultural change' and 'conflict between cultures', these studies avoid fundamental questions about the formation of the United States and its implications for the present and future. This approach to history allows one to safely put aside present responsibility for continued harm done by that past and the questions of reparations, restitution, and reordering society.
* "Multiculturalism became the cutting edge of post-civil-rights movement US history revisionism. For this scheme to work–and affirm US historical progress–Indigenous nations and communities had to be left out of the picture. As territorially and treaty-based peoples in North America, they did not fit the grid of multiculturalism but were included by transforming them into an inchoate oppressed racial group, while colonized Mexican Americans and Puerto Ricans were dissolved into another such group, variously called "Hispanic" or "Latino." The multicultural approach emphasized the 'contributions' of individuals from oppressed groups to the country's assumed greatness. Indigenous peoples were thus credited with corn, beans, buckskin, log cabins, parkas, maple syrup, canoes, hundreds of place names, Thanksgiving, and even the concepts of democracy and federalism. But this idea of the gift-giving Indian helping to establish and enrich the development of the United States **is an insidious smoke screen meant to obscure the fact that the very existence of the country is a result of the looting of an entire continent and its resources**. The fundamental unresolved issues of Indigenous lands, treaties, and sovereignty could not but scuttle the premises of multiculturalism." p. 5
* "With multiculturalism, manifest destiny won the day. As an example, in 1994, Prentice Hall (part of Pearson Education) published a new college-level US history textbook, authored by four members of a new generation of revisionist historians. These radical social historians are all brilliant scholars with posts in prestigious universities. The book's title reflects the intent of its authors and publisher: *Out of Many: A History of the American People*. The origin story of a supposedly unitary nation, albeit now multicultural, remained intact. The original cover design featured a multicolored woven fabric–this image meant to stand in place of the discredited 'melting pot'.
* "With a traditional Navajo dwelling, a hogan, in the background, the woman was shown kneeling in front of a traditional loom, weaving a nearly finished rug. The design? The Stars and Stripes! The authors, upon hearing my objection and explanation that Navajo weavers make their livings off commissioned work that includes the desired design, responded: 'But it's a real photograph'. To the authors' credit, in the second edition they replaced the cover photograph and removed the Navajo picture inside, although the narrative text remains unchanged. 
* "Awareness of the settler-colonialist context of US history writing is essential...The form of colonialism that the Indigenous peoples of North America have experienced was modern from the beginning: the expansion of European corporations, backed by government armies, into foreign areas, with subsequent expropriation of lands and resources. Settler colonialism is a genocidal policy. Native nations and communities, while struggling to maintain fundamental values and collectivity, have from the beginning resisted modern colonialism using both defensive and offensive techniques, including the modern forms of armed resistance of national liberation movements and what now is called terrorism.
* "In every instance, Native nations have fought for survival as peoples. The objective of US colonialist authorities was to terminate their existence as peoples–not as random individuals. This is the very definition of modern genocide as contrasted with premodern instances of extreme violence that did not have the goal of extinction. The United States as a socioeconomic and political entity is a result of this centuries-long and ongoing colonial process. Modern Indigenous nations and communities are societies formed by their resistance to colonialism...It is breathtaking, but no miracle, that they have survived as peoples." p. 6-7
* "To say that the United States is a colonialist settler-state is not to make an accusation but rather to face historical reality, without which consideration not much in US history makes sense, unless Indigenous peoples are erased. **But Indigenous nations, through resistance, have survived and bear witness to this history.**"

### Neocolonialism p. 7
* During the second half of the 20th century, "the former colonial powers and their intellectual apologists mounted a counterforce, often called *neocolonialism*, from which multiculturalism and postmodernism emerged."
	* "Although much revisionist US history reflects neocolonialist strategy–**an attempt to accommodate new realities in order to retain the dominance**–neocolonialist methods signal victory for the colonized.
	* "Such approaches pry off a lid long kept tightly fastened.
	* "One result has been the presence of significant numbers of Indigenous scholars in US universities who are changing the terms of analysis. 
	* "The main challenge for scholars in revising US history in the context of colonialism is not lack of information, nor is it one of methodology. **Rather, the source of the problems has been the refusal or inability of US historians to comprehend the nature of their own history, US history. The fundamental problem is the absence of the colonial framework.**" p. 7

### Settler Colonialism p. 7-8
	
* "Through economic penetration of Indigenous societies, the European and Euro-American colonial powers created economic dependency and imbalance of trade, then incorporated the Indigenous nations into spheres of influence and **controlled them indirectly or as protectorates, with indispensable use of Christian missionaries and alcohol**. In the case of US settler colonialism, **land was the primary commodity**. With such obvious indicators of colonialism at work, why should so many interpretations of US political-economic development be convoluted and obscure, avoiding the obvious? p. 7
* "...the twentieth-century emergence of the field of 'US West' or 'Borderlands' history has been forced into an incomplete and flawed settler-colonialist framework. The father of that field of history, Frederick Jackson Turner, confessed as much in 1901: 'Our colonial system did not start with the Spanish War [1898]; the U.S. had had a colonial history and policy from the beginning of the Republic; but they have been hidden under the phraseology of *interstate migration* and *territorial organization*.'" p. 7-8
* "The **notion that settler-indigenous conflict is an inevitable product of cultural differences and misunderstandings**, or that violence was committed equally by the colonized and the colonizer, **blurs the nature of the historical processes**. 

### Genocidal policies p. 8-10

* "Euro-American colonialism, an aspect of the capitalist economic globalization, had from its beginnings a genocidal tendency...US history, as well as inherited Indigenous trauma, cannot be understood without dealing with the genocide that the United States committed against Indigenous peoples...The absence of even the slightest note of regret or tragedy in the annual celebration of the US independence betrays a deep disconnect in the consciousness of US Americans." p. 8-9
* "Ojibwe historian Jean O'Brien names the practice of writing Indians out of existence 'firsting and lasting'.
	* "All over the continent, local histories, monuments, and signage narrate the story of first settlement: the founder(s), the first school, first dwelling, first everything, as if there had never been occupants who thrived in those places before Euro-Americans. On the other hand, the national narrative tells of 'last' Indians or last tribes, such as 'the last of the Mohicans', 'Ishi, the last Indian', and *End of the Trail*, as a famous sculpture by James Earle Fraser is titled."
* Four distinct periods of offical genocidal policies by US administrations
	1. Jacksonian period of forced removal (1830s)
	2. California Gold Rush in Northern California (1849-1850s)
	3. post-Civil War era of the so-called Indian wars in the Great Plains (1850s-1870s)
	4. 1950s termination period
* 1873 quote from General William Sherman: 'We must act with vindictive earnestness against the Sioux, even to their extermination, men, women and children...during an assault, the soldiers can not pause to distinguish between male and female, or even discriminate as to age.' p. 9-10
* Patrick Wolfe: 'the peculiarity of settler colonialism is that the goal is elimination of Indigenous populations in order to make land available to settlers. That project is not limited to government policy, but rather involves all kinds of agencies, voluntary militias, and the settlers themselves acting on their own.' p. 10
* "There are more than 500 federally recognized Indigenous communities and nations–nearly 3 million people in the US." p. 10

### Reservations p. 11
* "In the era of US treaty-making from independence to 1871, the concept of the reservation was one of the Indigenous nation **reserving a narrowed land base from a much larger one in exchange** for US government protection from settlers and the provision of social services.
* "In the late nineteenth century, as Indigenous resistance was weakened, the concept of the reservation changed to one of land being carved out of the public domain of the United States as a benevolent gesture, a 'gift' to the Indigenous peoples. 
* Rhetoric changed so that reservations were said to have been 'given' or 'created' for Indians. With this shift, Indian reservations came to be seen as enclaves within state boundaries. Despite the political and economic reality, **the impression to many was that Indigenous people were taking a free ride on public domain**."

### Macro US Narrative from 1776 - present p.12-13
* "According to the origin narrative, the United States was born of rebellion against oppression–against empire–and thus is the product of the first anticolonial revolution for national liberation. The narrative flows from that fallacy: the broadening and deepening of democracy; the Civil War and the ensuing 'second revolution', which ended slavery; the twentieth-century mission to save Europe from itself-twice; and the ultimately triumphant fight against the scourge of communism, with the United States inheriting the difficult and burdensome task of keeping order in the world. It's a narrative of progress. p. 12
* "The 1960s social revolutions, ignited by the African American liberation movement, complicated the origin narrative, but its structure and periodization have been left intact. After the 1960s, historians incorporated women, African Americans, and immigrants as contributors to the commonweal. 
* "Indeed, the revised narrative produced the 'nation of immigrants' framework, which obscures the US practice of colonization, merging settler colonialism with immigration to metropolitan centers during and after the industrial revolution. 
* "**Native peoples, to the extent that they were included at all, were renamed 'First Americans' and thus themselves cast as distant immigrants.**
* "The provincialism and national chauvinism of US history production make it difficult for effective revisions to gain authority. Scholars, both Indigenous and a few non-Indigenous, who attempt to rectify the distortions, are labeled advocates, and their findings are rejected for publication on that basis. 
* Indigenous scholars look to research and thinking that has emerged in the rest of the European-colonized world. To understand the historical and current experiences of Indigenous peoples in the United States, these thinkers and writers draw upon and creatively apply the historical materialism of Marxism, the liberation theology of Latin America, Frantz Fanon's psychosocial analyses of the effects of colonialism on the colonizer and the colonized, and other approaches, including development theory and postmodern theory.
* "While not abandoning insights gained from those sources, due to the 'exceptional' nature of US colonialism among nineteenth-century colonial powers, Indigenous scholars and activists are engaged in exploring new approaches." p. 13

### Summary p. 13-14
* "Such histories have been written, and are being written by historians of Diné, Lakota, Mohawk, Tlingit, Muskogee, Anishinaabe, Lumbee, Inuit, Kiowa, Cherokee, Hopi, and other Indigenous communities and nations that have survived colonial genocide.
* "Indigenous peoples, now in a colonial relationship with the United States, inhabited and thrived for millennia before they were displaced to fragmented reservations and economically decimated.
* "This book attempts to tell the story of the United States as a colonialist settler-state, one that, like colonialist European states, crushed and subjugated the original civilizations in the territories it now rules. This is the history of the United States." p. 14

## Chapter 1: Follow the Corn p. 15

### Pre-Agricultural Milestones
* [Pre-Homo sapiens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Early_expansions_of_hominins_out_of_Africa#Early_dispersals)
	* Gracile australopithecines evolved in East Africa around 4m years ago.
	* Earliest evidence of hominids outside of Africa 2mya
	*  Humanoids "living in small communal groups" eventually populated all continents except for Antartica.
* [Modern Humans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recent_African_origin_of_modern_humans)
	* Out of Africa (OOA) aka Recent Single-Origin Hypothesis (RSOH)
	* H. sapiens evolved in the Horn of Africa 200k-300k years ago
	* 220,000 years ago, some migration as far as Greece
	* 120,000 ya, migrations as far as [Maghreb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maghreb) and the Arabian Peninsula
	* This wave of migration seems to have died out about 80,000 ya
	* Most significant "recent wave" out of Africa was 50-70,000 ya via the [Sourthern Route](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_Dispersal) 

### Americas
* Domestication of plants happened around 11,000 years ago (8,500 BC) in seven regions around the world.
* Three of these areas of first agriculture were located in the Americas: (1) The Valley of Mexico and Central America; (2) South-Central Andes in South America; and (3) eastern North America
* In contrast to animal domestication in Eurasia / Africa, Native American societies focused on game management.

### The Sacred Corn Food p. 16
* Evidence of cultivated corn date back 10,000 years (~8000 BC).
* By 6800 - 6500 BC, "evidence of corn production had spread all the way from the southern tip of South America to the subartic of North America, and from the Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean."
* "Since there is no evidence of corn on any other continent prior to its post-Columbus dispersal, its development is a unique invention of the original American agriculturalists. Unlike most grains, corn cannot grow wild and cannot exist without attentive human care."
* This also meant that there were centuries of cultural and commercial interchange among the peoples of the Americas; "traders carried seeds as well as other goods and cultural practices."
* Because corn can only live without water for 30 days at most, the more arid regions--of which there were many--"required the design and construction of irrigation systems". These systems were built as early as 800 - 500 BC.
* Combination of corn, squash, and beans provide complete protein. p. 17
* By 1490s, 100 million people lived in the Americas, 40m in North America (ex-Central America). Central Mexico alone supported ~30m people, at a time when the population of Europe was 50m (all land west of the Urals).

### Disease-Free and Well-Fed p. 17
* Relatively disease free
* Herbal medicine, surgery, dentistry
* Perhaps most important was hygenic and ritual bathing on a regular basis
* "The majority of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas had healthy, mostly vegetarian diets based on the staple of corn and supplemented by wild fish, fowl, and four-legged animals. 
* "People lived long and well with abundant ceremonial and recreational periods."

### Up From Mexico / Story of Mesoamerica / Mayans / Olmecs p. 17
* Brief overview of "peoples' history of the Valley of Mexico and Central America, often called [Mesoamerica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mesoamerica)." p. 18
	* [Major Eras of Mesoamerican History](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mesoamerican_chronology#Chronology)
	* **Before 3500 BC** Paleo-Indian Period
	* **3500-2000 BC** Archaic Period
	* **2000 BC - 250 CE** Preclassical aka Formative Era
	* **250 - 900 CE** Classical Period
	* **900 - 1521 CE** Postclassical Period
	* Post-conquest Era
		* **1521 - 1821** Colonial Period
		* **1821 - present** Postcolonial Period
	* **Mayan civilization** occuped most of Mesoamerica, including all of the Yucatán Peninsula.
		* 2M people lived in [the Mayan Civilization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Maya_civilization) during the five centuries of its pinnacle which occurred during the Classic Period, 250 - 900 CE. 
		* "Mayan culture astonishes all who study it, and it is often compared to Greek (Athenian) culture. At its core was the cultivation of corn; religion was constructed around this vital food." p. 18
		* "By 36 BC, [Mayans had] invented the concept of zero" and had other highly advanced developments in math and astronomy.
	* **Olmec civilization** was to the west, building the great city of Teotihuacán. [Origins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teotihuacan#History) were in the first century CE and reached its peak between 350-450 AD. The impressiveness and population of this city would not be rivalled anywhere in the Americas until the peak of Aztec civilization almost 1000 years later.
	* "Beginning in AD 750, **Toltec civilization** dominated the region for four centuries, absorbing the Olmecs. Colossal buildings, sculptures, and markets made up the Toltec cities, which housed extensive libraries and universities. They created multiple cities, the largest being Tula. The Toltecs' written language was based on the Mayan form, as was the calendar they used in scientific research, particularly in astronomy and medicine." p. 19
	* "In 1426, the **Aztecs of Tenochtitlán** formed an alliance with the** Texcoco** and **Tlacopan** peoples and **overthrew Tepanec rule**. The allies proceeded to wage war against neighboring peoples and eventually succeeded in gaining control over the Valley of Mexico. The Aztecs emerged as dominant in the Triple Alliance and moved to bring all the peoples of Mexico under their tributary authority." p. 19-20

### Extensive trade networks p. 20
* The powerful Aztec state included "...elaborate markets in each city and a far-flung trade network that used routes established by the Toltecs."
* "Aztec merchants acquired turquoise from Pueblos who mined it in what is now the US Southwest to sell in central Mexico where it had become the most valued of all material possessions and was used as a means of exchange or a form of money. Sixty-five thousand turquoise artifacts in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, are evidence of the importance of turquoise as a major precolonial commodity. Other items were also valuable marketable commodities in the area, salt being close to turquoise in value. Ceramic trade goods involved interconnected markets from Mexico City to Mesa Verde, Colorado. Shells from the Gulf of California, tropical bird feathers from the Gulf Coast area of Mexico, obsidian from Durango, Mexico, and flint from Texas were all found in the ruins of Casa Grande (Arizona), the commercial center of the northern frontier. Turquoise functioning as money was traded to acquire macaw and parrot feathers from tropical areas for religious rituals, seashells from coastal peoples, and hides and meat from the northern plains. The stone has been found in precolonial sites in Texas, Kansas, and Nebraska, where the Wichitas served as intermediaries, carrying turquoise and other goods farther east and north." p. 20


## Chapter 2: Culture of Conquest p. 32
* "...the culture of conquest didn't start with Europeans crossing the Atlantic. European institutions and the worldview of conquest and colonialism had formed several centuries before that. From the eleventh through the thirteenth centuries, Europeans conducted the Crusades to conquer North Africa and the Middle East, leading to unprecedented wealth in the hands of a few. This profit-based religion was the deadly element that European merchants and settlers brought to the Americas."
* "In addition to seeking personal wealth, colonizers expressed a Christian zeal that justified colonialism. Along with that came the militaristic tradition that had also developed in western Europe during the Crusades (literally, 'carrying of the cross'). Although the popes, beginning with Urban II, called for most of the ventures, the crusading armies were mercenary outfits that promised the soldiers the right to sack and loot Muslim towns and cities, feats that would gain them wealth and prestige back home.
* "Toward the end of the thirteenth century, the papacy began directing such mercenaries to crush domestic "enemies" in their midst, as well-pagans and commoners in general, especially women (as ostensible witches) and heretics. In this way, knights and noblemen could seize land and force the commoners living on it into servitude. 
* "Historian Peter Linebaugh notes that whereas the anti-Muslim Crusades were attempts to control the lucrative Muslim trade routes to the Far East, the domestic crusades against heretics and commoners were carried out to terrorize poor people and at the same time to enlist them in the lucrative and adventurous yet holy venture: 'Crusading was thus a murderous device to resolve a contradiction by bringing baron and commoner together in the cauldron of religious war'.
* "The first population forcibly organized under the profit motive-­whose labor was exploited well before overseas exploitation was possible--was the European peasantry. Once forced off their land, they had nothing to eat and nothing to sell but their labor. In addition, entire nations, such as Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Bohemia, the Basque Country, and Catalonia, were colonized and forced under the rule of various monarchies. The Moorish Nation and the Sephardic Jewish minority were conquered and physically deported by the Castilian/Aragon monarchy from the Iberian Peninsula--a long-term project culminating in group expulsions beginning in 1492, the year Columbus sailed to America. The institutions of colonialism and methods for relocation, deportation, and expropriation of land had already been practiced, if not perfected, by the end of the fifteenth century. 
* "**The rise of the modern state in western Europe was based on the accumulation of wealth by means of exploiting human labor and displacing millions of subsistence producers from their lands.** The armies that did this work benefited from technological innovations that allowed the development of more effective weapons of death and destruction. When these states expanded overseas to obtain even more resources, land, and labor, they were not starting anew. The peoples of the Caribbean, Central America, Mexico, and the Andes were the first overseas victims. West and South Africa, North America, and the rest of South America followed. Then came all of Africa, the Pacific, and Asia.
* "The sea voyages of European explorers and merchants in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries were not the first of their kind. These voyagers borrowed the techniques for long-distance sea travel from the Arab world. Before the Arabs ventured into the Indian Ocean, Inuits (Eskimos) plied the Arctic Circle in their kayaks for centuries and made contacts with many peoples, as did Norse, South Asian, Chinese, Japanese, Peruvian, and Melanesian and Polynesian fishing peoples of the Pacific. Egyptian and Greek knowledge of the seas most likely extended beyond the Mediterranean, into the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Western European seagoing merchants and the monarchies that backed them would differ only in that they had developed the bases for colonial domination and exploitation of labor in those colonies that led to the capture and enslavement of millions of Africans to transport to their American colonies." p.34

### Land as Private Property p. 34

* "Along with the cargo of European ships, especially of the later British colonizing ventures, came the emerging concept of land as private property. Esther Kingston-Mann, a specialist in Russian land tenure history, has reconstructed the elevation of land as private property to "sacred status" in sixteenth-century England. The English used the term "enclosure" to denote the privatization of the commons. During this time, peasants, who constituted a large majority of the population, were evicted from their ancient common lands. For centuries the commons had been their pasture for milk cows and for running sheep and their source for water, wood for fuel and construction, and edible and medicinal wild plants. 
* "Without these resources they could not have survived as farmers, and they did not survive as farmers after they lost access to the commons. Not only were the commons privatized during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, they were also transformed into grazing lands for commercial sheep production, wool being the main domestic and export commodity, creating wealth for a few and impoverishment for the many. Denied access to the former commons, rural subsistence farmers and even their children had no choice but to work in the new woolen textile factories under miserable conditions--that is, when they could find such work because unemployment was high. Employed or not, this displaced population was available to serve as settlers in the North American British colonies, many of them as indentured servants, with the promise of land. After serving their terms of indenture, they were free to squat on Indigenous land and become farmers again. In this way, surplus labor created not only low labor costs and great profits for the woolens manufacturers but also a supply of settlers for the colonies, which was an 'escape valve' in the home country, where impoverishment could lead to uprisings of the exploited. The sacred status of property in the forms of land taken from Indigenous farmers and of Africans as chattel was seeded into the drive for Anglo-American independence from Britain and the founding of the United States.
* "Privatization of land was accompanied by an ideological drive to paint the commoners who resisted as violent, stupid, and lazy. The English Parliament, under the guise of fighting backwardness, criminalized former rights to the commons. Accompanying and facilitating the privatization of the commons was the suppression of women, as feminist theorist Silvia Federici has argued, by conjuring witchcraft. Those accused of witchcraft were poor peasant women, often widows, while the accusers tended to be wealthier, either their landlords or employers, individuals who controlled local institutions or had ties to the national government. Neighbors were encouraged to accuse one another. Witchcraft was considered mainly a female crime, especially at the peak of the witch hunts between 1550 and 1650, when more than 80 percent of those who were charged with witchcraft, tried, convicted, and executed were women. In England, those accused of witchcraft were mostly elderly women, often beggars, sometimes the wives of living laborers but usually widows." p.35
* "Actions and local occurrences said to indicate witchcraft included nonpayment of rent, demand for public assistance, giving the "evil­eye," local die-offs of horses or other stock, and mysterious deaths of children. Also among the telltale actions were practices related to midwifery and any kind of contraception. **The service that women provided among the poor as healers was one of a number of vestiges from pre-Christian, matrilineal institutions that once predominated in Europe. It is no surprise that those who had held on to and perpetuated these communal practices were those most resistant to the enclosure of the commons, the economic base of the peasantry, as well as women's autonomy.**
* "The traumatized souls thrown off the land, as well as their descendants, became the land-hungry settlers enticed to cross a vast ocean with the promise of land and attaining the status of gentry. English settlers brought witch-hunting with them to Jamestown, Virginia, and to Salem, Massachusetts. In language reminiscent of that used to condemn witches, they quickly identified the Indigenous populations as inherently children of Satan and 'servants of the devil' who deserved to be killed. Later the Salem authorities would justify witch trials by claiming that the English settlers were inhabiting land controlled by the devil." p. 36

### White Supremacy and Class p. 36

* "Also part of the Christian colonizers' outlook was a belief in white supremacy. As an 1878 US Protestant evangelical hymn suggests--'Are your garments spotless? / Are they white as snow? / Are they washed in the blood of the lamb?'--whiteness as an ideology involves much more than skin color, although skin color has been and continues to be a key component of racism in the United States. White supremacy can be traced to the colonizing ventures of the Christian Crusades in Muslim-controlled territories and to the Protestant colonization of Ireland. As dress rehearsals for the coloniza­ tion of the Americas, these projects form the two strands that merge in the geopolitical and sociocultural makeup of US society.

#### Pure Blood, Jews, Moors, and the Spanish Inquisition

* "The Crusades in the Iberian Peninsula (Spain and Portugal today) and expulsion of Jews and Muslims were part of a process that created the core ideology for modern colonialism--white supremacy--and its justification for genocide. The Crusades gave birth to the papal law of *limpieza de sangre*-cleanliness of blood-for which the Inquisition was established by the Church to investigate and determine. **Before this time the concept of biological race based on "blood" is not known to have existed as law or taboo in Christian Europe or anywhere else in the world.** As scapegoating and suspicion of *conversos* (Jews who had converted to Christianity) and *moriscos* (Muslims who had converted to Christianity) intensified over several centuries in Christian-controlled Spain, the doctrine of *limpieza de sangre* was popularized. 
* "It had the effect of granting psychological and increasingly legal privileges to 'Old Christians', both rich and poor, thus obscuring the class differences between the landed aristocracy and land-poor peasants and shepherds. Whatever their economic station, the 'Old Christian' Spanish were enabled to identify with the nobility. As one Spanish historian puts it, "The common people looked upwards, wishing and hoping to climb, and let themselves be seduced by chivalric ideals: honour, dignity, glory, and the noble life." 
* "Lope de Vega, a sixteenth-century contemporary of Cervantes, wrote: 'Soy un hombre, I aunque de villana casta, I limpio de sangre y jamas I de hebrea o mora manchada' (I am a man, although of lowly status, yet clean of blood and with no mixture of Jewish or Moorish blood).

#### Race and England

* "This cross-class mind-set can be found as well in the stance of descendants of the old settlers of British colonization in North America. This then is the first instance of class leveling based on imagined racial sameness-the origin of white supremacy, the essential ideology of colonial projects in America and Africa. **As Elie Wiesel famously observed, the road to Auschwitz was paved in the earliest days of Christendom.** Historian David Stannard, in *American Holocaust*, adds the caveat that the same road led straight through the heart of America. The ideology of white supremacy was paramount in neutralizing the class antagonisms of the landless against the landed and distributing confiscated lands and properties of Moors and Jews in Iberia, of the Irish in Ulster, and of Native American and African peoples.
* "Great Britain, emerging as an overseas colonial power a century after Spain did, absorbed aspects of the Spanish racial caste system into its colonialist rationalizations, particularly regarding African slavery, but it did so within the context of Protestantism, which imagined a chosen people founding and raising a New Jerusalem. The English did not just adapt the habits and experiences of Spanish colonization; they had their own prior experience, which actually constituted overseas imperialism. During the early seventeenth century the English conquered Ireland and declared a half-million acres of land in the north open to settlement. The settlers who served early settler colonialism came mostly from western Scotland. England had previously conquered Wales and Scotland, but it had never before attempted to remove so large an Indigenous population and plant settlers in their place as in Ireland. The ancient Irish social system was systematically attacked, traditional songs and music forbidden, whole clans exterminated, and the remainder brutalized. A 'wild Irish' reservation was even attempted. The 'plantation' of Ulster was as much a culmination of, as it was a departure from, centuries of intermittent warfare in Ireland. 
* "In the sixteenth century, the official in charge of the Irish province of Munster, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, ordered that:
	> *the heddes of all those (of what sort soever thei were) which were killed in the daie, should be cutte off from their bodies and brought to the place where he [Gilbert] incamped at night, and should there bee laied on the ground by eche side of the waie ledying into his owne tente so that none could come into his tente for any cause but commonly he muste passe through a lane of heddes which he used ad terrorem... [It brought] greate terrour to the people when thei sawe the heddes of their dedde fathers, brothers, children, kindsfolke, and friends... [It brought] greate terrour to the people when thei sawe the heddes of their dedde fathers, brothers, children, kindsfolke, and friends.*
* "The English government paid bounties for the Irish heads. Later only the scalp or ears were required. A century later in North America, Indian heads and scalps were brought in for bounty in the same manner. Although the Irish were as 'white' as the English, transforming them into alien others to be exterminated previewed what came to be perceived as racialist when applied to Indigenous peoples of North America and to Africans.
* "At that conjuncture, both in the Christian Crusades against Muslims and England's invasion of Ireland, the transition from religious wars to the genocidal mode of colonialism is apparent. The Irish under British colonial rule, well into the twentieth century, continued to be regarded as biologically inferior. During the mid-nineteenth century, influenced by Social Darwinism, some English scientists peddled the theory that the Irish (and all people of color) had descended from apes, while the English were descendants of "man," who had been created by God "in his own image." Thus the English were "angels" and the Irish (and other colonized peoples) were a lower species, which today US "Christian Identity" white supremacists call "mud people," inferior products of the process of evolution. The same Sir Humphrey Gilbert who had been in charge of the colonization of Ulster planted the first English colonial settlement in North America in Newfoundland in the summer of 1583. In the lead-up to the formation of the United States, Protestantism uniquely refined white supremacy as part of a politico-religious ideology." p.39

### Terminal Narratives p. 39

* "According to the current consensus among historians, the wholesale transfer of land from Indigenous to Euro-American hands that occurred in the Americas after 1492 is due less to European invasion, warfare, and material acquisitiveness than to the bacteria that the invaders unwittingly brought with them. Historian Colin Calloway is among the proponents of this theory, and he writes that 'epidemic diseases would have caused massive depopulation in the Americas whether brought by European invaders or brought home by Native American traders'. 
* "Such an absolutist assertion renders any other fate for the Indigenous peoples improbable. Professor Calloway is a careful and widely respected historian of Indigenous North America, but his conclusion articulates a default assumption. 
* "The thinking behind the assumption is both ahistorical and illogical in that Europe itself lost a third to one-half of its population to infectious disease during medieval pandemics. The principal reason the consensus view is wrong and ahistorical is that it erases the effects of settler colonialism with its antecedents in the Spanish "Reconquest" and the English conquest of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. 
* "By the time Spain, Portugal, and Britain arrived to colonize the Americas, their methods of eradicating peoples or forcing them into dependency and servitude were ingrained, streamlined, and effective. If disease could have done the job, it is not clear why the European colonizers in America found it necessary to carry out unrelenting wars against Indigenous communities in order to gain every inch of land they took from them--nearly three hundred years of colonial warfare, followed by continued wars waged by the independent republics of the hemisphere."
* "Whatever disagreement may exist about the size of precolonial Indigenous populations, no one doubts that a rapid demographic decline occurred in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, its timing from region to region depending on when conquest and colonization began. Nearly all the population areas of the Americas were reduced by 90 percent following the onset of colonizing projects, decreasing the targeted Indigenous populations of the Americas from one hundred million to ten million. Commonly referred to as the most extreme demographic disaster--framed as natural--in human history, it was rarely called genocide until the rise of Indigenous movements in the mid-twentieth century forged questions.
* "US scholar Benjamin Keen acknowledges that historians 'accept uncritically a fatalistic *epidemic plus lack of acquired immunity* explanation for the shrinkage of Indian populations, without sufficient attention to the socioeconomic factors...which predisposed the natives to succumb to even slight infections.' 
* "Other scholars agree. Geographer William M. Denevan, while not ignoring the existence of widespread epidemic diseases, has emphasized the role of warfare, which reinforced the lethal impact of disease. There were military engagements directly between European and Indigenous nations, but many more saw European powers pitting one Indigenous nation against another or factions within nations, with European allies aiding one or both sides, as was the case in the colonization of the peoples of Ireland, Africa, and Asia. 
* "Other killers cited by Denevan are overwork in mines, frequent outright butchery, malnutrition and starvation resulting from the breakdown of Indigenous trade networks, subsistence food production and loss of land, loss of will to live or reproduce (and thus suicide, abortion, and infanticide), and deportation and enslavement. 
* "Anthropologist Henry Dobyns has pointed to the interruption of Indigenous peoples' trade networks. When colonizing powers seized Indigenous trade routes, the ensuing acute shortages, including food products, weakened populations and forced them into dependency on the colonizers, with European manufactured goods replacing Indigenous ones. Dobyns has estimated that all Indigenous groups suffered serious food shortages one year in four. In these circumstances, the introduction and promotion of alcohol proved addictive and deadly, adding to the breakdown of social order and responsibility. These realities render the myth of 'lack of immunity', including to alcohol, pernicious. 
* "Historian Woodrow Wilson Borah focused on the broader arena of European colonization, which also brought depopulation in the Pacific Islands, Australia, western Central America, and West Africa. 
* "Sherburne Cook--associated with Borah in the revisionist Berkeley School, as it was called--studied the attempted destruction of the California Indians. Cook estimated 2,245 deaths among peoples in Northern California--the Wintu, Maidu, Miwak, Omo, Wappo, and Yokuts Nations--in late-eighteenth-century armed conflicts with the Spanish, while some 5,ooo died from disease and another 4,000 were relocated to missions. Among the same people in the second half of the nineteenth century, US armed forces killed 4,000, and disease killed another 6,000. Between 1852 and 1867, US citizens kidnapped 4,000 Indian children from these groups in California. Disruption of Indigenous social structures under these conditions and dire economic necessity forced many of the women into prostitution in goldfield camps, further wrecking what vestiges of family life remained in these matriarchal societies.
* "Proponents of the default position emphasize attrition by disease despite other causes equally deadly, if not more so. In doing so they refuse to accept that the colonization of America was genocidal by plan, not simply the tragic fate of populations lacking immunity to disease. In the case of the Jewish Holocaust, no one denies that more Jews died of starvation, overwork, and disease under Nazi incarceration than died in gas ovens, yet the acts of creating and maintaining the conditions that led to those deaths clearly constitute genocide.
* "Anthropologist Michael V. Wilcox asks, 'What if archaeologists were asked to explain the continued presence of descendant communities five hundred years after Columbus instead of their disappearance or marginality?' Cox calls for the active dismantling of what he terms *terminal narratives*-'accounts of Indian histories which explain the absence, cultural death, or disappearance of Indigenous peoples.'

### Gold Fever p. 42

* "Searching for gold, Columbus reached many of the islands of the Caribbean and mapped them. Soon, a dozen other soldier-merchants mapped the Atlantic coast from the northern Maritimes to the tip of South America. From the Iberian Peninsula came merchants, mercenaries, criminals, and peasants. They seized the land and property of Indigenous populations and declared the territories to be extensions of the Spanish and Portuguese states. These acts were confirmed by the monarchies and endorsed by the papal authority of the Roman Catholic Church. The Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494 divided the 'New World' between Spain and Portugal with a line drawn from Greenland south through what is now Brazil. Called the *Doctrine of Discovery*, it claimed that possession of the entire world west of that line would be open to Spanish conquest and all east of it to Portuguese conquest.
* "The story is well known. In 1492, Columbus sailed with three ships on his first voyage at the behest of Ferdinand, King of Aragon, and Isabella, Queen of Castille. The marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella in 1469 had led to the merger of their kingdoms into what would become the core of the Spanish state. Columbus planted a colony of forty of his men on *Espanola* (renamed to the island of Santo Domingo and divided into the Dominican Republic and and Haiti) and returned to Spain with Indigenous slaves and gold. In 1493, Columbus returned to the Caribbean with seventeen ships, more than a thousand men, and supplies. He found that the men he had left on the first trip had subsequently been killed by the Indigenous inhabitants. After planting another settlement, Columbus returned to Spain with four hundred Arawak slaves. With seven ships, Columbus returned to the Caribbean in 1498, reaching what is now Venezuela, and he made a fourth and final voyage in 1502, this time touching the Caribbean coast of Central America. In 1513, Vasco Núñez de Balboa crossed the Isthmus of Panama and charted the Pacific coast of the Americas. Juan Ponce de León claimed the Florida peninsula for Spain in 1513. In 1521, following a three-year bloodbath and overthrow of the Aztec state, Hernando Cortés proclaimed Mexico as New Spain. 
* "Parallel with the crushing of Mexican resistance were Ferdinand Magellan's explorations and charting of the Atlantic coast of the South American continent, followed by Spanish wars against the Inca Nation of the Andes. In both Mexico and Peru, the conquistadors confiscated elaborate artwork and statuary made of gold and silver to be melted down for use as money. During the same period, the Portuguese laid waste to what is today Brazil and began a thriving slave trade that would funnel millions of enslaved Africans to South America, beginning the lucrative Atlantic slave trade.
* "The consequences of this amassing of fortunes were first felt in the catastrophe experienced by small farmers in Europe and England. The peasants became impoverished, dependent workers crowded into city slums. For the first time in human history, the majority of Europeans depended for their livelihood on a small wealthy minority, a phenomenon that capitalist-based colonialism would spread worldwide. The symbol of this new development--indeed its currency--was gold. Gold fever drove colonizing ventures, organized at first in pursuit of the metal in its raw form. Later the pursuit of gold became more sophisticated, with planters and merchants establishing whatever conditions were necessary to hoard as much gold as possible. Thus was born an ideology: the belief in the inherent value of gold despite its relative uselessness in reality. 
* "Investors, monarchies, and parliamentarians devised methods to control the processes of wealth accumulation and the power that came with it--but the ideology behind gold fever mobilized settlers to cross the Atlantic to an unknown fate. Subjugating entire societies and civilizations, enslaving whole countries, and slaughtering people village by village did not seem too high a price to pay, nor did it appear inhumane. The systems of colonization were modern and rational, but its ideological basis was madness." p. 44

## Chapter Three: Cult of the Covenant p. 45

### Myth of the Pristine Wilderness

* "With the onset of colonialism in North America, control of the land was wrenched away from the Indigenous peoples; the forests grew dense, so that later European settlers were unaware of the former cultivation and sculpting and manicuring of the landscape. Abandoned fields of corn turned to weeds and bushes. Settlers chopped down trees in New England until the landscape was nearly bare. One geographer notes, 'Paradoxical as it may seem, there was undoubtedly much more *forest primeval* in 1850 than in 1650.' Anglo-Americans who did observe Native habitat management in action misunderstood what they saw. Captain John Palliser, traveling through the prairies in the 1850s, complained about the Indians' 'disastrous habit of setting the prairie on fire for the most trivial and worse than useless reasons.' In 1937, Harvard naturalist Hugh Raup claimed that the 'open, park-like woods' written about in earlier times had been, 'from time immemorial, characteristic of vast areas in North America' and could not have been the result of human management. 
* "In the founding myth of the United States, the colonists acquired a vast expanse of land from a scattering of benighted peoples who were hardly using it--an unforgivable offense to the Puritan work ethic. The historical record is clear, however, that European colonists shoved aside a large network of small and large nations whose governments, commerce, arts and sciences, agriculture, technologies, theologies, philosophies, and institutions were intricately developed, nations that maintained sophisticated relations with one another and with the environments that supported them. By the early seventeenth century, when British colonists from Europe began to settle in North America, a large Indigenous population had long before created "a humanized landscape almost everywhere," as William Denevan puts it. Native peoples had created town sites, farms, monumental earthworks, and networks of roads, and they had devised a wide variety of governments, some as complex as any in the world. They had developed sophisticated philosophies of government, traditions of diplomacy, and policies of international relations. They conducted trade along roads that crisscrossed the landmasses and waterways of the American continents. Before the arrival of Europeans, North America was indeed a 'continent of villages,' but also a continent of nations and federations of nations." p. 46
* "Many have noted that had North America been a wilderness, undeveloped, without roads, and uncultivated, it might still be so, for the European colonists could not have survived. They appropriated what had already been created by Indigenous civilizations. They stole already cultivated farmland and the corn, vegetables, tobacco, and other crops domesticated over centuries, took control of the deer parks that had been cleared and maintained by Indigenous communities, used existing roads and water routes in order to move armies to conquer, and relied on captured Indigenous people to identify the locations of water, oyster beds, and medicinal herbs. Historian Francis Jennings was emphatic in addressing what he called the myth that 'America was virgin land, or wilderness, inhabited by nonpeople called savages':
> *European explorers and invaders discovered an inhabited land. Had it been pristine wilderness then, it would possibly be so still today, for neither the technology nor the social organization of Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had the capacity to maintain, of its own resources, outpost colonies thousands of miles from home. Incapable of conquering true wilderness, the Europeans were highly competent in the skill of conquering other people, and that is what they did. They did not settle a virgin land. They invaded and displaced a resident population. This is so simple a fact that it seems self-evident.*

### The Calvinist Origin Story p.47

* "All modern nation-states claim a kind of rationalized origin story upon which they fashion patriotism or loyalty to the state. When citizens of modern states and their anthropologists and historians look at what they consider 'primitive' societies, they identify their *origin stories*--quaint and endearing stories, but fantastic ones--not grounded in 'reality'. 
* "Yet many US scholars seem unable--or unwilling--to subject their own nation-state's founding story to the same objective examination. The United States is not unique among nations in forging an origin myth, but most of its citizens believe it to be exceptional among nation-states, and this exceptionalist ideology has been used to justify appropriation of the continent and then domination of the rest of the world. It is one of the few states founded on the covenant of the Hebrew Torah, or the Christian borrowing of it in the Old Testament of the Bible. Other covenant states are Israel and the now-defunct apartheid state of South Africa, both of which were founded in 1948. Although the origin stories of these three covenant states were based on Judea-Christian scripture, they were not founded as theocracies. According to the myths, the faithful citizens come together of their own free will and pledge to each other and to their god to form and support a godly society, and their god in turn vouchsafes them prosperity in a promised land."
* "The influence of the scriptures was pervasive among many of the Western social and political thinkers whose ideas the founders of the first British colonies in North America drew upon. Historian Donald Harman Akenson points to the way that 'certain societies, in certain eras of their development', have looked to the scriptures for guidance, and likens it to the way 'the human genetic code operates physiologically. That is, this great code has, in some degree, directly determined what people would believe and when they would think and what they would do'. Dan Jacobson, a citizen of Boer-ruled South Africa, whose parents were immigrats, observes that: 
> *like the Israelites, and their fellow Calvinists in New England, [the Boers] believed that they had been called by their God to wander through the wilderness, to meet and defeat the heathen, and to occupy a promised land on his behalf...A sense of their having been summoned by divine decree to perform an ineluctable historical duty has never left the Boers, and has contributed to both their strength and their weakness.*
* "Founders of the first North American colonies and later of the United States had a similar sense of a providential opportunity to make history. Indeed, as Akenson reminds us, 'it is from [the] scriptures that western society learned how to think historically'. The key moment in history according to covenant ideology 'involves the winning of *the Land* from alien, and indeed evil, forces'.
* "The principal conduit of the Hebrew scriptures and covenant ideology to European Christians was John Calvin, the French religious reformer whose teachings coincided with the advent of the European invasion and colonization of the Americas. The Puritans drew upon Calvinist ideology in founding the Massachusetts Bay Colony, as did the Dutch Calvinist settlers of the Cape of Good Hope in founding their South African colony during the same period. Calvinism was a Protestant Christian movement with a strong separatist political component. In accord with the doctrine of predestination, Calvin taught that human free will did not exist. Certain individuals are *called* by God and are among the *elect*. Salvation therefore has nothing to do with one's actions; one is born as part of the elect or not, according to God's will. 
* "Although individuals could not know for certain if they were among the elect, outward good fortune, especially material wealth, was taken to be a manifestation of election; conversely, bad fortune and poverty--not to speak of dark skin--were taken as evidence of damnation. 'The attractiveness of such a doctrine to a group of invading colonists . . . is obvious,' Akenson observes, 'for one could easily define the natives as immutably profane--and damned--and oneself as predestined to virtue'.
* "Since another sign of justification was a person's ability to abide by the laws of a well-ordered society, Calvin preached the obligation of citizens to obey lawful authority. In fact, they should do so even when that authority was lodged in poor leaders (one of the seeds for 'my country right or wrong'). Calvin led his Huguenot followers across the border into Geneva, took political control of the city-state, and established it as a republic in 1541. The Calvinist state enacted detailed statutes governing every aspect of life and appointed functionaries to enforce them. The laws reflected Calvin's interpretation of the Old Testament; dissenters were forced to leave the republic, and some were even tortured and executed.
* "Although the US Constitution represents for many US citizens a covenant with God, the US origin story goes back to the 'Mayflower Compact', the first governing document of the Plymouth Colony, named for the ship that carried the hundred or so passengers to what is now Cape Cod, Massachusetts, in November 1620. Forty-one of the 'Pilgrims'--all men--wrote and signed the compact. Invoking God's name and declaring themselves loyal subjects of the king, the signatories announced that they had journeyed to northern 'Virginia--as the eastern seaboard of North America was called by the English--'to plant the First Colony' and did therefore 'Covenant and Combine ourselves together in a Civil Body Politic' to be governed by 'just and equal Laws' enacted 'for the general good of the Colony, unto which we promise all due submission and obedience'. 
* "The original settlers of Massachusetts Bay Colony, founded in 1630, adopted an official seal designed in England before their journey. The central image depicts a near-naked native holding a harmless, flimsy-looking bow and arrow and inscribed with the plea, 'Come over and help us'. Nearly three hundred years later, the official seal of the US military veterans of the 'Spanish-American War' (the invasion and occupation of Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Philippines) showed a naked woman kneeling before an armed US soldier and a sailor, with a US battleship in the background. 
* "One may trace this recurrent altruistic theme into the early twenty-first century, when the United States still invades countries under the guise of rescue." p. 50
* "In other modern constitutional states, constitutions come and go, and they are never considered sacred in the manner patriotic US citizens venerate theirs. Great Britain has no written constitution. The Magna Carta arguably comes close, but it does not reflect a covenant. 
* "US citizens did not inherit their cult-like adherence to their constitution from the English. From the Pilgrims to the founders of the United States and continuing to the present, the cultural persistence of the covenant idea, and thus the bedrock of US patriotism, represents a deviation from the main course in the development of national identities. Arguably, both the 1948 birth of the state of Israel and advent of Nationalist Party rule of South Africa were emulations of the US founding; certainly many US Americans closely identify with the state of Israel, as they did with Afrikaner-ruled South Africa. Patriotic US politicians and citizens take pride in 'exceptionalism'. Historians and legal theorists characterize US statecraft and empire as those of a 'nation of laws', rather than one dominated by a particular class or group of interests, suggesting a kind of holiness.
* "The US Constitution, the Mayflower Compact, the Declaration of Independence, the writings of the 'Founding Fathers', Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, the Pledge of Allegiance, and even Martin Luther King Jr.'s 'I Have a Dream' speech are ·all bundled into the covenant as sacred documents that express the US state religion. An aspect of this most visible in the early twenty-first century is the burgeoning 'gun lobby'--based on the sanctity of the Second Amendment to the Constitution. In the forefront of these Second Amendment adherents are the descendants of the old settlers who say that they represent 'the people' and have the right to bear arms in order to overthrow any government that does not in their view adhere to the God-given covenant." p. 50
* "Parallel to the idea of the US Constitution as covenant, politicians, journalists, teachers, and even professional historians chant like a mantra that the United States is a 'nation of immigrants'. From its beginning, the United States has welcomed--indeed, often solicited, even bribed--immigrants to repopulate conquered territories 'cleansed' of their Indigenous inhabitants. 
* "From the mid-nineteenth century, immigrants were recruited to work mines, raze forests, construct canals and railroads, and labor in sweatshops, factories, and commercial farm fields. In the late twentieth century, technical and medical workers were recruited. The requirements for their formal citizenship were simple: adhere to the sacred covenant through taking the Citizenship Oath, pledging loyalty to the flag, and regarding those outside the covenant as enemies or potential enemies of the exceptional country that has adopted them, often after they escaped hunger, war, or repression, which in turn were often caused by US militarism or economic sanctions.
* "Yet no matter how much immigrants might strive to prove themselves to be as hardworking and patriotic as descendants of the original settlers, and despite the rhetoric of *E pluribus unum*, they are suspect. The old stock against which they are judged inferior includes not only those who fought in the fifteen-year war for independence from Britain but also, and perhaps more important, those who fought and shed (Indian) blood, before and after independence, in order to acquire the land. These are the descendants of English Pilgrims, Scots, Scots-Irish, and Huguenot French_-Calvinists all--who took the land bequeathed to them in the sacred covenant that predated the creation of the independent United States. These were the settlers who fought their way over the Appalachians into the fertile Ohio Valley region, and it is they who claimed blood sacrifice for their country. Immigrants, to be accepted, must prove their fidelity to the covenant and what it stands for.

### Settler Colonialism and the Ulster-Scots p.51

* "The core group of frontier settlers were the Ulster-Scots--the *Scots­Irish*, or 'Scotch-Irish', as they called themselves. Usually the descendants of these Scots-Irish say their ancestors came to the British colonies from Ireland, but their journey was more circuitous than that. The Scots-Irish were Protestants from Scotland who were recruited by the British as settlers in the six counties of the province of Ulster in northern Ireland. 
* "The British had seized these half-million acres from Irelandin the early seventeenth century, driven the indigenous Irish farmers from it, and opened it to settlement under English protection. 
* "This coincided with the English plantation of two colonies on the Atlantic coast of North America and the beginning of settler colonialism there. These early settlers came mostly from the Scottish lowlands. Scotland itself, along with Wales, had preceded Ireland as colonial notches in the belt of English expansion. Britain's colonization of Indigenous lands in North America was foreshadowed by its colonization of northern Ireland. By 1630 the new settlers in Ulster--21,000 Britons, including some Welsh, and 150,000 Lowland Scots--were more numerous than British settlers in all of North America at the time. 
* "In 1641, the indigenous Irish rebelled and killed ten thousand of the settlers, yet Protestant Scots settlers continued to pour in. In some formerly Irish areas, they formed a majority of the population. They brought with them the covenant ideology of Calvinism that had been the work of the Scotsman John Knox. Later John Locke--also a Scot--would secularize the covenant idea into a 'contract'--the social contract--whereby individuals sacrifice their liberty only through consent. An insidiously effective example, the US economic system, was based on Locke's theories.
* "So it was that the Ulster-Scots were already seasoned settler colonialists before they began to fill the ranks of settlers streaming toward the North American British colonies in the early eighteenth century, many of them as indentured servants. Before ever meeting Indigenous Americans, the Ulster settlers had perfected scalping for bounty, using the indigenous Irish as their victims. As this chapter and the following one show, the Scots-Irish were the foot soldiers of British empire building, and they and their descendants formed the shock troops of the 'westward movement' in North America, the expansion of the US continental empire and the colonization of its inhabitants. As Calvinists (mostly Presbyterian), they added to and transformed the Calvinism of the earlier Puritan settlers into the unique ideology of the US settler class.
* "In one of history's great migrations, nearly a quarter-million Scots-Irish left Ulster for British North America between 1717 and 1775. Although a number left for religious reasons, the majority were losers in the struggle over Britain's Irish policies, which brought economic ruin to Ireland's wool and linen industries. Hard times were magnified by prolonged drought, and so the settlers pulled up stakes and moved across the Atlantic. This is a story that would repeat itself time and time again in settler treks across North America, the majority of migrants ending up landless losers in the 'Monopoly game' of European settler colonialism.
* "The majority of Ulster-Scot settlers were cash-poor and had to indenture themselves to pay for their passage to North America. Once settled, they came to predominate as soldier-settlers. Most initially landed in Pennsylvania, but large numbers soon migrated to the southern colonies and to the backcountry, the British colonies' western borders, where they squatted on unceded Indigenous lands. Among frontier settlers, Scots-Irish predominated among settlers of English and German descent. Although the majority remained landless and poor, some became merchants and owners of plantations worked by slaves, as well as politically powerful. 
* "Seventeen presidents of the United States have been of Ulster-Scots lineage, from Andrew Jackson--founder of the Democratic Party--to Ronald Reagan, the Bushes, Bill Clinton, and Barack Obama on his mother's side. Theodore Roosevelt characterized his Scots-Irish ancestors as 'a stern, virile, bold and hardy people who formed the kernel of that American stock who were the pioneers of our people in the march westwards'.
* "Perhaps as influential as their being presidents, educators, and businessmen, the Scots-Irish engendered a strong set of individualist values that included the sanctity of glory in warfare. They made up the officer corps and were soldiers of the regular army, as well as the frontier-ranging militias that cleared areas for settlement by exterminating Indigenous farmers and destroying their towns.
* "The Seven Years' War between the British and the French (1754-63) was fought both in Europe and in North America, where the British colonists called it the *French and Indian War* because it was mainly a British war against the Indigenous peoples- some of whom formed alliances with the French. 
* "The British colonial militias consisted largely of frontier Scots-Irish settlers who wanted access to Indigenous farmland in the Ohio Valley region. By the time of US independence, Ulster-Scots made up 15 percent of the population of the thirteen colonies, and most were clustered in majority numbers in the backcountry. During the war for settler independence from Britain, most settlers who had emigrated directly from Scotland remained loyal to the British Crown and fought on that side. In contrast, the Scots-Irish were in the forefront of the struggle for independence and formed the backbone of Washington's fighting forces. Most of the names of soldiers at Valley Forge were Scots-Irish. They saw themselves, and their descendants see themselves, as the true and authentic patriots, the ones who spilled rivers of blood to secure independence and to acquire Indigenous lands--gaining blood rights to the latter as they left **bloody footprints across the continent**.
* "During the last two decades of the eighteenth century, first- and second-generation Scots-Irish continued to pour westward into the Ohio Valley region, West Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. They were the largest ethnic group in the westward migration, and they maintained many of their Scots-Irish ways. They tended to move three or four times, acquiring and losing land before settling at least somewhat permanently. Scots-Irish settlers were overwhelmingly farmers rather than explorers or fur traders. They cleared forests, built log cabins, and killed Indians, forming a human wall of colonization for the new United States and, in wartime, employing their fighting skills effectively. Historian Carl Degler writes that 'these hardy, God-fearing Calvinists made themselves into a veritable human shield of colonial civilization'. The next chapter explores the kind of counterinsurgent warfare they perfected, which formed the basis of US militarism into the twenty-first century." p.54
* "The Calvinist religion of the Scots-Irish--*Presbyterianism*--was in numbers of faithful soon second only to those of New England's Congregationalist Church. But on the frontier, Scots-Irish devotion to the formal Presbyterian Church waned. New evangelical offshoots refashioned Calvinist doctrines to decentralize and do away with the Presbyterian hierarchy. Although they continued to regard themselves as chosen people of the covenant, commanded by God to go into the wilderness to build the new Israel, **the Scots-Irish also saw themselves, as their descendants see themselves, as the true and authentic patriots, entitled to the land through their blood sacrifice**."

### Sacred Land Becomes Real Estate p.55

* "The land won through North American bloodshed was not necessarily conceived in terms of particular parcels for a farm that would be passed down through generations. Most of the settlers who fought for it kept moving on nearly every generation. In the South many lost their holdings to land companies that then sold it to planters seeking to increase the size of their slave-worked plantations. Without the unpaid forced labor of enslaved Africans, a farmer growing cash crops could not compete on the market. Once in the hands of settlers, the land itself was no longer sacred, as it had been for the Indigenous. Rather, it was private property, a commodity to be acquired and sold--every man a possible king, or at least wealthy. Later, when Anglo-Americans had occupied the continent and urbanized much of it, this quest for land and the sanctity of private property were reduced to a lot with a house on it, and 'the land' came to mean the country, the flag, the military, as in *the land of the free* of the national anthem, or Woody Guthrie's 'This Land Is Your Land'. Those who died fighting in foreign wars were said to have sacrificed their lives to protect 'this land' that the old settlers had spilled blood to acquire. **The blood spilled was largely Indigenous**.
* "These then were the settlers upon which the national myths are based, the ultimately dispensable cannon fodder for the taking of the land and the continent, the foot soldiers of empire, the "yeoman farmers" romanticized by Thomas Jefferson. They were not of the ruling class, although a few slipped through and later were drawn in by the ruling class as elected officials and military officers, thereby maintaining the facade of a classless society and a democratic empire. The founders were English patricians, slave owners, large land barons, or otherwise successful businessmen dependent on the slave
trade and exports produced by enslaved Africans and on property sales. When descendants of the settler class, overwhelmingly Presbyterian or otherwise Calvinist Protestant, were accepted into the ruling class, they usually became Episcopalians, members of an elite church linked to the state Church of England. As we look at the bloody deeds of the settlers in acquiring and maintaining land, the social class context is an essential element.

## Chapter 4: Bloody Footprints p.56

> *For the first 200 years of our military heritage, Americans depended on arts of war that contemporary professional soldiers supposedly abhorred: razing and destroying enemy villages and fields; killing enemy women and children; raiding settlements for captives; intimidating and brutalizing enemy noncombatants; and assassinating enemy leaders...In the frontier wars between 1607 and 1814, Americans forged two elements--unlimited war and irregular war--into their first way of war.* 
>
> –John Grenier, **The First Way of War**

* "Within days of the assassination of Osama bin Laden, on May 2, 2011, it was revealed that the Navy SEAL team executing the mission had used the code name *Geronimo* for its target. A May 4 report in the *New York Daily News* commented, 'Along with the unseen pictures of Osama Bin Laden's corpse and questions about what Pakistan knew, intelligence officials' reasons for dubbing the Al Qaeda boss *Geronimo* remain one of the biggest mysteries of the Black Ops mission'. 
* "The choice of that code name was not a mystery to the military, which also uses the term 'Indian Country' to designate enemy territory and identifies its killing machines and operations with such names as UH-1B/C Iroquois, OH-58D Kiowa, OV-1 Mohawk, OH-6 Cayuse, AH-64 Apache, S-58/H-34 Choctaw, UH-60 Black Hawk, Thunderbird, and Rolling Thunder.
* "The last of these is the military name given to the relentless carpet­ bombing of Vietnam peasants in the mid-196os. There are many other current and recent examples of the persistence of the colonial­ ist and imperialist sensibilities at the core of a military grounded in wars against the Indigenous nations and communities of North America. 
* "On February 19, 1991, Brigadier General Richard Neal, briefing reporters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, stated that the US military wanted to be certain of speedy victory once it committed land forces to *Indian Country*. The following day, in a little-publicized statement of protest, the National Congress of American Indians pointed out that fifteen thousand Native Americans were serving as combat troops in the Persian Gulf. Neither Neal nor any other military authority apologized for the statement. The term 'Indian Country' in cases such as this is not merely an insensitive racial slur, tastelessly but offhandedly employed to refer to the enemy. It is, rather, a technical military term, like *collateral damage* or *ordnance* that appears in military training manuals and is regularly used to mean *behind enemy lines*. It is often shortened to **In Country**. This usage recalls the origins and development of the US military, as well as the nature of US political and social history as a colonialist project. 
* "Furthermore, 'Indian Country' is a legal term that identifies Native jurisdiction under US colonial laws but is also an important tool for Native nations to use in maintaining and expanding their land bases in the process of decolonization. 'Indian Country'--the legal term--includes not only federally recognized reservation territories, but also informal reservations, dependent Native communities and
allotments, and specially designated lands." 

### Roots of Genocide p.57

* "Military historian John Grenier--in *The First Way of War: American War Making on the Frontier, 1607-1814*--offers an indispensable analysis of the colonialist warfare against the Indigenous peoples of the North American territories claimed by Great Britain. The way of war largely devised and enacted by settlers formed the basis for the founding ideology and colonialist military strategy of the independent United States, and this approach to war is still in force in the twenty-first century. 
* "Grenier writes that he began his study with the goal of tracing the historical roots of the use of unlimited war by the United States, war whose purpose is to destroy the will of the enemy people or their capacity to resist, employing any means necessary but mainly by attacking civilians and their support systems, such as food supply. Today called 'special operations' or 'low-intensity conflict', that kind of warfare was first used against Indigenous communities by colonial militias in Virginia and Massachusetts. These irregular forces, made up of settlers, sought to disrupt every aspect of resistance as well as to obtain intelligence through scouting and taking prisoners. They did so by destroying Indigenous villages and fields and intimidating and slaughtering enemy noncombatant populations.
* "Grenier analyzes the development of the US way of war from 1607-1814, during which the US military was forged, leading to its reproduction and development into the present. US historian Bernard Bailyn calls the period 'barbarous' and a 'conflict of civilizations', but Bailyn represents the Indigenous civilization as 'marauders' that the European settlers needed to get rid of. From this formative period, Grenier argues, emerged problematic characteristics of the US way of war and thereby the characteristics of its civilization, which few historians have come to terms with.
* "**In the beginning, Anglo settlers organized irregular units to brutally attack and destroy unarmed Indigenous women, children, and old people using unlimited violence in unrelenting attacks.** *During nearly two centuries of British colonization, generations of settlers, mostly farmers, gained experience as 'Indian fighters' outside any organized military institution.* Anglo-French conflict may appear to have been the dominant factor of European colonization in North America during the eighteenth century, but while large regular armies fought over geopolitical goals in Europe, Anglo settlers in North America waged deadly irregular warfare against the Indigenous communities. 
* "Much of the fighting during the fifteen-year settlers' war for independence, especially in the Ohio Valley region and western New York, was directed against Indigenous resisters who realized it was not in their interest to have a close enemy of settlers with an independent government, as opposed to a remote one in Great Britain. Nor did the fledgling US military in the 1790s carry out operations typical of the state-centered wars occurring in Europe at the time. 
* "Even following the founding of the professional US Army in the 1810's, irregular warfare was the method of the US conquest of the Ohio Valley and Mississippi Valley regions. Since that time, Grenier notes, irregular methods have been used in tandem with operations of regular armed forces.
* "**The chief characteristic of irregular warfare is that of the extreme violence against civilians, in this case the tendency to seek the utter annihilation of the Indigenous population.** 'In cases where a rough balance of power existed', Grenier observes, 'and the Indians even appeared dominant--as was the situation in virtually every frontier war until the first decade of the 19th century--[settler] Americans were quick to turn to extravagant violence.'
* "Many historians who acknowledge the exceptional one-sided colonial violence attribute it to racism. **Grenier argues that rather than racism leading to violence, the reverse occurred: the out-of-control momentum of extreme violence of unlimited warfare fueled race hatred.**
* "'Successive generations of Americans, both soldiers and civilians, made the killing of Indian men, women, and children a defining element of their first military tradition and thereby part of a shared American identity. Indeed, only after seventeenth- and early­ eighteenth-century Americans made the first way of war a key to being a white American could later generations of *Indian haters*, men like Andrew Jackson, turn the Indian wars into race wars.' 
* "By then, the Indigenous peoples' villages, farmlands, towns, and entire nations formed the only barrier to the settlers' total freedom to acquire land and wealth. Settler colonialists again chose their own means of conquest. Such fighters are often viewed as courageous heroes, but killing the unarmed women, children, and old people and burning homes and fields involved neither courage nor sacrifice.
* "So it was from the planting of the first British colonies in North America. Among the initial leaders of those ventures were military men--mercenaries--who brought with them their previous war experiences in Britain's imperialist, anti-Muslim Crusades. Those who put together and led the first colonial armies, such as John Smith in Virginia, Myles Standish at Plymouth, John Mason in Connecticut, and John Underhill in Massachusetts, had fought in the bitter, brutal, and bloody religious wars ongoing in Europe at the time of the first settlements. They had long practiced burning towns and fields and killing the unarmed and vulnerable. 'Tragically for the Indian peoples of the Eastern Seaboard', Grenier observes, 'the mercenaries unleashed a similar way of war in early Virginia and New England'." 

### Settler-Parasites Create The Virginia Colony p.60

* "The first Jamestown settlers lacked a supply line and proved unable or unwilling to grow crops or hunt for their own sustenance. They decided that they would force the farmers of the Powhatan Confederacy--some thirty polities--to provide them with food. Jamestown military leader John Smith threatened to kill all the women and children if the Powhatan leaders would not feed and clothe the settlers as well as provide them with land and labor. The leader of the confederacy, Wahunsonacock, entreated the invaders:
	> *Why should you take by force that from us which you can have by love? Why should you destroy us, who have provided you with food? What can you get by war?...What is the cause of your jealousy? You see us unarmed, and willing to supply your wants, if you will come in a friendly manner, and not with swords and guns, as to invade an enemy.
* "Smith's threat was carried out: war against the Powhatans started in August 1609 and the destruction of the Powhatans became the order of the day. The war dragged on for a year until the English governor, Thomas Gage, ordered forces mobilized by George Percy, a mercenary who had fought in the Netherlands, 'to take revenge' and destroy the Indigenous population. In his report following the assault, Percy gloated over the gruesome details of killing all the children. Despite the terrorizing tactics of the settlers, the Powhatans were able to protect their grain storage buildings and force the Jamestown settlers to shelter within their colonial fortress. Meanwhile the Powhatans organized a stronger confederacy. In 1622, they attacked all the English settlements along the James River, killing 350--a third of the settler population. Unable to eliminate the Indigenous population by force of arms, the colonists resorted to a 'feedfight', as Grenier identifies it--systematic destruction of all the Indigenous agricultural resources. 
* "A dozen years later an even greater conflict broke out, **the Tidewater War (1644-46)**. Hardly a war, it consisted rather of settlers continuously raiding Indigenous villages and fields with the goal of starving the people out of the area. There followed three decades of peace, from which the settlers inferred that total war and expulsion of the Indigenous people worked. The few Indigenous families that remained in eastern Virginia were under the absolute dominance of the English. It was clear, Grenier points out, that 'the English would tolerate Indians within and near their settlements provided they essentially neither saw nor heard them'. In the absence of Indigenous sources of food and labor, the colonists brought in enslaved Africans and indentured European servants to do the work.
* "By 1676, the settler population of Virginia had mushroomed and English tobacco farmers were encroaching on the lands of the Susquehannock people. When the Susquehannocks resisted, a war broke out that went badly for the English. In 1676, the Virginia House of Burgesses formed a mounted force of 125 men to range through a particular cluster of Indigenous villages and thereby overcome Susquehannock resistance. 
* "This was the immediate background of **Bacon's Rebellion, so beloved by populist US historians and those who search for the onset of racialized servitude in the British colonies**. The rebellion occurred when Anglo settler-farmers along with landless indentured servants--both Anglo and African--took into their own hands the slaughter of Indigenous farmers with the aim of taking their land. *The plantation owners who ruled the colony were troubled, to be sure, by the interracial aspect of the uprising*. **Soon after, Virginia law made greater distinction between indentured servants and slaves and codified the permanent status of slavery for Africans.** 
* "The point is an important one, but there is a larger issue. **Bacon's Rebellion affected the development of genocidal policies aimed at the Indigenous peoples--namely, the creation of wealth in the colonies based on landholding and the use of landless or land-poor settler-farmers as foot soldiers for moving the settlement frontier deeper into Indigenous territories.** *That the rebellion's leader, Nathaniel Bacon, was a wealthy planter reveals the relationship between the wealthy landed settlers and the poorer, often landless, settlers. Historian Eric Foner rightly concludes that the rebellion was a power play by Bacon against the Virginia governor William Berkeley and his planter allies, as Bacon's financial backers included other wealthy planters opposed to Berkeley*."

### In The Name of God p.62

* "What transpired up the coast in the founding and growth of the New England colony was different, at least at first. Just before the 1620 landing of the Mayflower, smallpox had spread from English trading ships off the coast to the Pequot fishing and farming communities on land, greatly reducing the population of the area the Plymouth Colony would occupy. King James attributed the epidemic to God's 'great goodness and bounty toward us'. Consequently, those who survived in the Indigenous communities had little means to immediately resist the settlers' expropriation of their lands and resources. Sixteen years later, however, the Indigenous villages had recovered and were considered a barrier to the settlers moving into Pequot territory in Connecticut. A single violent incident triggered a devastating Puritan war against the Pequots in what the colony's annals and subsequent history texts call the Pequot War.
* "The Puritan settlers, as if by instinct, jumped immediately into a hideous war of annihilation, entering Indigenous villages and killing women and children or taking them hostage. The Pequots responded by attacking English settlements, including Fort Saybrook in Connecticut. Connecticut authorities commissioned mercenary John Mason to lead a force of soldiers from that colony and Massachusetts to one of the two Pequot strongholds on the Mystic River. Pequot fighters occupied one of the forts, while the other one contained only women, children, and old men. The latter was the one John Mason targeted. Slaughter ensued. After killing most of the Pequot defenders, the soldiers set fire to the structures and burned the remaining inhabitants alive.
* "This kind of war was alien to the Indigenous peoples. According to their ways of war, when relations between groups broke down and conflict came, warfare was highly ritualized, with quests for individual glory, resulting in few deaths. Colonial wars inevitably drew other Indigenous communities in on one side or the other. During the Pequot War, neighboring Narragansett villages allied with the Puritans in hopes of reaping a large harvest of captives, booty, and glory. 
* "But after the carnage was done, the Narragansetts left the Puritan side in disgust, saying that the English were 'too furious' and 'slay[ed] too many men'. After having made the Pequots the enemy, the settlers set out to complete the destruction. Fewer than two hundred half-starved Pequots remained of the two thousand at the beginning of the war. Although they had ceased fighting and were without any means of defense, the settlers started a new attack on the Pequots. The colony commissioned the mercenary Mason and his murderous crew of forty men to burn the few remaining homes and fields. Puritan William Bradford wrote at the time in his *History of Plymouth Plantation*:
	> *Those that scaped the fire were slaine with the sword; some hewed to peeces, others rune throw with their rapiers, so as they were quickly dispatchte, and very few escaped. It was conceived they thus destroyed about 400 at this time. It was a fearful sight to see them thus frying in the fyer, and the streams of blood quenching the same, and horrible was the stincke and sente there of, but the victory seemed a sweete sacrifice, and they gave the prayers thereof to God, who had wrought so wonderfully for them, thus to inclose their enemise in their hands, and give them so speedy a victory over so proud and insulting an enimie.*
* "The other Indigenous nations of the region assessed what was in store for them and accepted tributary status under the colonial authority.
* "During the late seventeenth century, Anglo settlers in New England began the routine practice of scalp hunting and what Grenier identifies as *ranging*--the use of settler-ranger forces. By that time, the non-Indigenous population of the English colony in North America had increased sixfold, to more than 150,000, which meant that settlers were intruding on more of the Indigenous homelands. 
* "**Indigenous resistance followed in what the settlers called King Philip's War.** Wampanoag people and their Indigenous allies attacked the settlers' isolated farms, using a method of guerrilla warfare that relied on speed and caution in striking and retreating. The settlers scorned this kind of resistance as "skulking," and responded by destroying Indigenous villages--again extirpation. But Indigenous guerrilla attacks continued, and so the commander of the Plymouth militia, Benjamin Church, studied Indigenous tactics in order to develop a more effective kind of preemption. He petitioned the colony's governor for permission to choose sixty to seventy settlers to serve as scouts, as he called them, for what he termed 'wilderness warfare'. In July 1676, the first settler-organized ranger force was the result. The rangers--60 settlers and 140 colonized Indigenous men--were to 'discover, pursue, fight, surprise, destroy, or subdue' the enemy, in Church's words. The inclusion of Indigenous fighters on the colonists' side has marked settler colonialism and foreign occupations ever since. The settler-rangers could learn from their Native aides, then discard them. In the following two decades, Church perfected his evolving method of annihilation."

### "Redskins" p.64

* "Indigenous people continued to resist by burning settlements and killing and capturing settlers. As an incentive to recruit fighters, colonial authorities introduced a program of scalp hunting that became a permanent and long-lasting element of settler warfare against Indigenous nations. During the Pequot War, Connecticut and Massachusetts colonial officials had offered bounties initially for the heads of murdered Indigenous people and later for only their scalps, which were more portable in large numbers. But scalp hunting became routine only in the mid-1670s, following an incident on the northern frontier of the Massachusetts colony. 
* Scalp-hunting "began in earnest in 1697 when settler Hannah Dustin, having murdered ten of her Abenaki captors in a nighttime escape, presented their ten scalps to the Massachusetts General Assembly and was rewarded with bounties for two men, two women, and six children."
* "**Dustin soon became a folk hero among New England settlers. Scalp hunting became a lucrative commercial practice.** The settler authorities had hit upon a way to encourage settlers to take off on their own or with a few others to gather scalps, at random, for the reward money. 'In the process', John Grenier points out, 'they established the large-scale privatization of war within American frontier communities'. 
* "Although the colonial government in time raised the bounty for adult male scalps, lowered that for adult females, and eliminated that for Indigenous children under ten, the age and gender of victims were not easily distinguished by their scalps nor checked carefully. **What is more, the scalp hunter could take the children captive and sell them into slavery. These practices erased any remaining distinction between Indigenous combatants and noncombatants and introduced a market for Indigenous slaves.** 
* "Bounties for Indigenous scalps were honored even in absence of war. Scalps and Indigenous children became means of exchange, currency, and this development may even have created a black market. *Scalp hunting was not only a profitable privatized enterprise but also a means to eradicate or subjugate the Indigenous population of the Anglo-American Atlantic seaboard.* The settlers gave a name to the mutilated and bloody corpses they left in the wake of scalp­ hunts: redskins.
* "This way of war, forged in the first century of colonization--destroying Indigenous villages and fields, killing civilians, ranging, and scalp hunting--became the basis for the wars against the Indigenous across the continent into the late nineteenth century."

### Colonial Expansion p.65

* "Having cleared the Indigenous populations from much of the coastal region from New England to the Carolinas, another wave of settlers employed the same kind of warfare in establishing the colony of Georgia beginning in 1732. Technically, it was part of Spanish-occupied Florida called *Guale*. 
* "From the time the first settlers squatted on Indigenous land in Georgia, rangers were in the forefront of ethnic cleansing, clearing the region for British settlement. Brigadier General James Oglethorpe, commander in chief of the Georgia colony, tried but failed to turn his own small regular army into rangers, so he commissioned Hugh Mackay Jr. to organize the regulars into a Highland ranger force. A settler agent for the Georgia colony, Mackay was a former British army officer and a Scots Highlander. **The Highlanders were reputed to be tough, fearless fighters--in other words, brutal killers.** It was unusual at the time to put a local militia officer in command of army regulars.
* "The Indigenous population of Georgia consisted primarily of the Cherokee Nation. The colonizers realized it would be impossible to persuade the Cherokees to accept or defend Georgia settlers if war broke out between Britain and Spain over British encroachment into Spanish *Guale*. Traders from Carolina had already brought smallpox and rum to the Cherokees, which had killed many in their villages and made them suspicious of all English people. Oglethorpe himself visited Cherokee towns but was rebuffed. 
* "Meanwhile Spanish agents were also trying to win over the Cherokees to fight on their side against the British. In the fall of 1739, on the verge of war, Oglethorpe won commitment from some Cherokee villages in exchange for corn, but he was aware that, like other Indigenous nations, the Cherokees would likely play one colonial power against the other for their own interests and could change sides at any moment. 
* "In December, English invasion farther into Spanish territory began. Anglo and Scots rangers and their Indigenous allies destroyed Spanish plantations and intimidated the Maroon communities in northern Florida composed of local Indigenous families and escaped African slaves from the British colonies. The rangers sacked and looted, burned and pillaged, while hunting scalps of Spanish-allied Indigenous people and runaway slaves. 
* "Lasting nearly a month, the operations ravaged Florida, in part because the Spanish put up little fight. During the 1740s, the British War Office and Parliament commissioned two companies of colonial rangers and authorized more than a hundred men for full-time duty in the Highland Rangers in Georgia. Ranging, looting, and scalp hunting continued.

### War That Turns The Tide p.67

* "The decade leading up to the outbreak of the French and Indian War (1754-63), known in Europe as the *Seven Years' War*, saw conflict on the British-French frontiers in New England, New York, and Nova Scotia, all of which were well populated with Indigenous villages of various nations as well as **French settlers called Acadians**. A clash of interests among British settlers, Indigenous communities, and Acadians in the region of the present-day Canadian Maritime Provinces led to a four-year conflict that the British called *King George's War*. 
* "Although Britain had gained nominal possession of Nova Scotia, it could not control the population of Acadians and the mixed communities of intermarried Acadians and Mi'kmaq and Malisset people. The Acadian-Indigenous villages insisted on neutrality in the British and French disputes, and the powerful Haudenosaunee Confederacy supported them in that stance. 
* "But British imperialists wanted the land, and they permitted Anglo-American settlers to play a prominent role in the fighting, which included ranging and scalp hunting. By the end of the war, settler­rangers dominated the British military presence in Nova Scotia, setting off sustained Acadian-Indigenous resistance against British rule. 
* "At the **outbreak of the French and Indian War**, while the British regular army and navy focused on French imperial positions in the Maritimes (eastern provinces of modern-day Canada), the settler militia forces continued ranging against the Acadian-Indigenous villages, which led to an expulsion of the Acadians, sometimes known today as the Great Upheaval. 
* "**In a period of weeks, British army forces and colonial militias forced four thousand noncombatants out of Nova Scotia, and at least half that number died in the Acadian diaspora. Some eight thousand escaped deportation by fleeing into the woods. The Acadians thus became the largest population of European settlers in North American history to be forcibly dispersed. This feat was accomplished with slaughter, intimidation, and plunder. By this time, there was no hesitation on the part of Anglo settlers to consider unarmed civilians of all ages as appropriate targets of violence.**
* "Major General Jeffrey Amherst--after whom Amherst, Massachusetts is named--commanded the British army in the North American theater of the Seven Years' War. In 1759, Amherst appointed Major Robert Rogers, the seasoned leader of New England's *Rogers's Rangers* and perhaps the most famous and admired ranger in frontier lore, to lead a force of settler-rangers, British volunteers, and allied Stockbridge Indigenous scouts--all to be handpicked by Rogers. 
* "Amherst ordered them to attack a resistant Abenaki village in the St. Lawrence River Valley. **Although Amherst ordered Rogers not to allow torture or killing of women or children, the commander would have known about these rangers' reputation of sparing no one in their blood-drenched raids on Indigenous villages.** *In commissioning Rogers, Amherst effectively sanctioned settler-ranger counterinsurgent warfare.* 
* "In general, *the British military not only tolerated but made use of the settlers' dirty war*, in the Cherokee war, the subsequent French and Indian War, and in the effort to crush Pontiac's Rebellion of 1763, in which Amherst is best known for his support of using germ warfare against Indigenous people.
* "**'Could it not be contrived,' Amherst wrote to a subordinate officer, 'to Send the Small Pox among those Disaffected Tribes of Indians? We must, on this occasion, Use Every Stratagem in our power to Reduce them.' The colonel promised to do his best. Amherst then gave orders 'to bring them [Pontiac's forces and allies] to a proper Subjection' until 'there was not an Indian Settlement within a thousand Miles of our Country.'**"
