---
title: Part 3 - An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States
permalink: /dunbar-ortiz-2014-3/
sitemap: false
---

# [An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States | Part 3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Indigenous_Peoples%27_History_of_the_United_States)
* Author: [Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roxanne_Dunbar-Ortiz)
* Publication Date: 2014

-------

## Table of Contents
* [**Introduction**: This Land p. 1](/dunbar-ortiz-2014-1)
* **Chapter 1**: Follow the Corn p. 15
* **Chapter 2**: Culture of Conquest p. 32
* **Chapter 3**: Cult of the Covenant p. 45
* **Chapter 4**: Bloody Footprints p. 56
* [**Chapter 5**: The Birth of a Nation p. 78](/dunbar-ortiz-2014-2)
* **Chapter 6**: The Last of the Mohicans and Andrew Jackson's White Republic p. 95
* **Chapter 7**: Sea to Shining Sea p. 117
* **Chapter 8**: "Indian Country" p. 133
* **Chapter 9**:  US Triumphalism and Peacetime Colonialism p. 162
* **Chapter 10**:  Ghost Dance Prophecy: A Nation is Coming p. 178
* **Chapter 11**:  The Doctrine of Discovery p. 197
* **Conclusion**: The Future of the United States p. 218

-------

## Chapter 9: US Triumphalism and Peacetime Colonialism p. 162

* "Although US imperialism abroad might seem at first to fall outside the scope of this book, it's important to recognize that **the same methods and strategies that were employed with the Indigenous peoples on the continent were mirrored abroad**. 
* "*While the Indigenous Americans were being brutally colonized, eliminated, relocated, and killed, the United States from its beginning was also pursuing overseas dominance.* Between 1798 and 1827, the United States intervened militarily twenty-three times from Cuba to Tripoli (Libya) to Greece. There were seventy-one overseas interventions between 1831 and 1896--on all continents. 
* "**The United States dominated most of Latin America economically, some countries militarily.** The forty interventions and occupations between 1898 and 1919 were conducted with even more military heft but using the same methods and sometimes the same personnel.

### Connections p.163

* "US colonies established during 1898-1919 include Hawai'i (formerly called the Sandwich Islands), Alaska, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, and Northern Mariana. Most of these, and dozens more islands depopulated in the Pacific and Indian Oceans and the Caribbean for military bases and bomb testing--**remain colonies (called "territories" and "commonwealths") in the twenty-first century.
* "One of the first outspoken proponents of transoceanic imperialism was former abolitionist William H. Seward who was Lincoln's secretary of state and who considered it the destiny of the United States to dominate the Pacific Ocean. Seward did everything possible to fulfill that perceived destiny, including arranging the purchase of Alaska in 1867. 
* "In early 1874, the United States began military control of Hawai'i, and in 1898 it annexed the islands after overthrowing the Hawai'ian queen, Liliuokalani. Following post-World War II ascendancy to statehood, Indigenous Hawai'ians and Alaskan Natives were brought under similar US colonial rule as Native Americans.
* "Overseas ventures gained increasingly exuberant public support in the late nineteenth century. In the best-selling book *Our Country* (1885) the Reverend Josiah Strong of the American Home Missionary Society argued that the United States had inherited the mantle of Anglo-Saxonism and--as a superior race--had a divine responsibility to control the world. 
* "By 1914 there were six thousand US Protestant missionaries in China and thousands of others in every other part of the non-European world, and they remained, as from the early seventeenth century, ensconced in Native American communities.
* "The United States built the naval 'Great White Fleet' and **expanded the army from twenty-five thousand to nearly three hundred thousand men by the time it invaded and occupied Cuba**, undermining the ongoing independence movement against Spain there. 
* "While US troops were headed to Havana Harbor in 1898, Admiral George Dewey led the US Navy to intervene in the Philippines--purportedly to assist a force of thirty thousand indigenous Filipino rebels who had won and declared their independence from Spain. 
* "Dewey referred to the Filipinos as 'the Indians' and vowed to 'enter the city [Manila] and keep the Indians out'. 
* "It took the United States three more years to crush the Filipino 'Indian' resistance to US occupation--the army using counterinsurgency techniques practiced against the Indigenous nations of the North American continent. Under many of the same army commanders, they also began usingi new forms of torture such as water-boarding, and under many of the same army commanders. Twenty-six of the thirty US generals in the Philippines had been officers in the 'Indian wars.' Major General Nelson A. Miles, who had commanded the army in campaigns against Indigenous peoples, was put in general command of the army in the Philippines war.
* "**The continuity between invading and occupying sovereign Indigenous nations in order to achieve continental control in North America and employing the same tactics overseas to achieve global control is key to understanding the future of the United States in the world.** 
* "The military provided that continuity. As a colonel in the 1870s, Nelson Miles had been in charge of pursuing every last Sioux and herding them onto reservations guarded by troops or recently trained Indian police. The reservations were not safe havens for the incarcerated. *Struck By the Ree* told of multiple horrors of daily life on the Yankton Sioux Reservation, which was not out of the ordinary:
	> *Another time when General Sully came up he passed through the middle of our field, turned all his cattle and stock into our corn and destroyed the whole of it...The soldiers set fire to the prairie and burnt up four of our lodges and all there was in them...The soldiers are very drunken and come to our place--they have arms and guns; they run after our women and fire into our houses and lodges; one soldier came along and wanted one of our young men to drink, but he would not, and turned to go away, and the soldier shot at him. Before the soldiers came along we had good health; but once the soldiers come along they go to my squaws and want to sleep with them, and the squaws being hungry will sleep with them in order to get something to eat, and will get a bad disease, and then the squaws turn to their husbands and give them the bad disease.
* "As related in chapter 8, Miles had also led the army's pursuit of Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce as they sought to escape to Canada. In 1886 Miles took charge of the War Department's efforts to capture Geronimo--commanding five thousand soldiers--a third of the army's combat force, along with five hundred Apache scouts forced into service and thousands of volunteer settler militiamen. In 1898, now general-in-chief of the army, Miles personally commanded the army forces that seized Puerto Rico. 
* "Miles's second in command, General Wesley E. Merritt, was assigned to head the military invasion of the Philippines. He had served under Custer, fighting Sioux and Cheyenne resistance. Commanding the army occupation of the Philippines was General Henry W. Lawton, to whom Geronimo had turned himself in, making Lawton an instant hero for 'capturing' Geronimo. 
* "Lawton had led troops in Cuba before going to the Philippines. Ironically, Filipino insurgents under the leadership of a man named Geronimo killed Lawton in an attack. What these US officers had learned in counterinsurgency warfare in North America they applied against the Filipinos. Younger officers would apply lessons learned in the Philippines to future imperial ventures, or in at least one case, pass them to a son. General Arthur MacArthur, father of World War II General Douglas MacArthur, chased Filipino guerrilla leader Emilio Aguinaldo, finally capturing him.
* "By this time, Theodore Roosevelt was president. His corporate­friendly militarism, particularly his rapid development of the navy and his carefully staged performance as leader of the Rough Riders militia in Cuba, brought him to the presidency. 
* "He was popular with both settlers and big business. Roosevelt referred to Aguinaldo as a 'renegade Pawnee' and *observed that Filipinos did not have the right to govern their country just because they happened to occupy it*. 
* "Two hundred thousand US soldiers fought in the Philippines, suffering seven thousand casualties (3.5 percent). **Twenty percent of the Philippine population died, mostly civilians, as a result of the US Army's scorched-earth strategy (food deprivation, targeting civilians for killing, and so on) and displacement.** 
* "In 1904 Roosevelt pronounced what has come to be known as *the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine*. It mandated that any nation engaged in 'chronic wrong-doing'--that is, did anything to threaten perceived US economic or political interests--would be disciplined militarily by the United States, which was to serve as an 'international police power.'
* "As the US economy rapidly industrialized, the army also intervened frequently on the side of big business in domestic conflicts between corporations and workers. Troops were used for this purpose in the Great Railroad Strike of 1877--the first nationwide work stoppage-begun by railroad workers protesting wage cuts. 
* "Begun in West Virginia, the strike soon spread along rail lines from ocean to ocean and from north to south. General Philip Sheridan and his troops were called in from the Great Plains, where they had been campaigning against the Sioux, to halt the strike in Chicago.
* "Industrialization affected farming as machinery replaced farmers' hands and *cash crops came to prevail*. Large operators moved in and banks foreclosed on small farmers, leaving them landless. 
* "Farmers' movements, most of them socialist-leaning and anti-imperialist, opposed military conscription and US entry into World War I--the 'rich man's war', as they called it. Tens of thousands protested and carried out acts of civil disobedience. 
* "In August 1917, white, Black, and Muskogee tenant farmers and sharecroppers in several eastern and southern Oklahoma counties took up arms to stop conscription, with a larger stated goal of overthrowing the US government to establish a socialist commonwealth. **These more radically minded grassroots socialists had organized their own Working Class Union (WCU), with Anglo-American, African American, and Indigenous Muskogee farmers forming a kind of rainbow alliance.** 
* "Their plan was to march to Washington, DC, motivating millions of working people to arm themselves and to join them along the way. After a day of dynamiting oil pipelines and bridges in southeastern Oklahoma, the men and their families created a liberated zone where they ate, sang hymns, and rested. By the following day, heavily armed posses supported by police and militias stopped the revolt, which **became known as the Green Corn Rebellion**. 
* "Those who didn't get away were arrested and received prison sentences. The rebellion is today considered as the waning voice of the people pushed off the land, but **it also reflects the crisis induced by the forced allotment of Indigenous territories and the reality of a multiethnic resistance movement, a rare occurrence in US colonialist history.**
* "At the same time, **landless Indigenous farmers were launching a revolution in Mexico**. Before President Wilson put General John J. Pershing at the head of the American Expeditionary Forces in Europe in 1917, the president had sent him to lead troops, mainly buffalo soldiers, inside Mexico for nearly a year to stop **the revolution in the north led by Francisco 'Pancho' Villa**. 
* "The military intervention did not go well. *Even the Mexican federal troops fighting Villa resented the presence of US soldiers.* About the only notable success for the US military expedition was the killing of Villa's second-in-command by a young lieutenant named George Patton.

### Markets Kill p.167

* "The extension of US military power into the Pacific and Caribbean was not militarism for its own sake. Rather, *it was all about securing markets and natural resources, developing imperialist power to protect and extend corporate wealth*. 
* "Indigenous peoples in the United States were severely affected by US industrialization and the development of corporations. In a study of corporations in Indian Territory, **historian H. Craig Miner defines the corporation as 'an organization legally authorized by charter to act as a single individual, characterized by the issuance of stock and the limitation of liability of its stockholders to the amount of their respective investment...an artificial person that could not be held accountable in a manner familiar to the American Indian way of thinking. Individual responsibility could be masked in corporate personality...a legal abstraction.'**
* "The burgeoning of the corporation brought about a new era of attacks on Indigenous governments, lands, and resources. After the military power and resistance of Indigenous nations and communities were stifled by the growing US military machine following the Civil War, compliance on the part of Indigenous leaders became necessary for survival. 
* "Miner argues that 'industrial civilization' diminishes the relevance of persons or communities in its way and also notes that industrial civilization is not exactly the same as 'industrialization', that it is something quite different and more pervasive. 
* "Industrial civilization justified exploitation and destruction of whole societies and expansion without regard for the sovereignty of peoples; it promoted individualism, competition, and selfishness as righteous character traits. **The means by which the US government assured corporate freedom to intrude in Indigenous territories was federal trusteeship, the very instrument that was mandated to protect them.**
* "Beginning at the end of the Civil War, **government funds from Indigenous land sales or royalties were not distributed to reservation citizens or held by their governments; rather they were held in trust and managed in Washington**. 
* "The Bureau of Indian Affairs--without Indigenous peoples' consent--invested Indigenous funds in railroad companies and various municipal and state bonds. For instance, the Cherokee national fund and the Muskogee Creek Orphan Fund were so invested. **Indigenous leaders were well aware of these practices but were powerless to stop them.** 
* "They certainly did protest, as evidenced by a petition filed by the Chickasaw Nation: 
	> *The Indians did not lend this money; the United States lent it, to increase the value of its multiple states...But now the attempt is made to force the Indian to contribute his pittance to the growth of all this prosperity and power; and this, too, when the United States, triumphant over the perils that once surrounded it, is more than ever able to be liberal, although nothing more is asked of it than to be just.*
* "Cherokee official Lewis Downing--writing in 1869 that rules would have to be agreed on and adhered to--noted **the differences between Indigenous values and those of American businessmen**, 'in that industry, habit, and energy of character which is the result of the development of the idea of accumulation.' 
* "Free development without restraint of consensual policy would not do, Downing declared: 'To us, it appears that once cut loose from our treaty moorings, we will roll and tumble upon the tempestuous ocean of American politics and congressional legislation, and shipwreck [will] be our inevitable destination.'
* "**Entering the 1920s, Indigenous peoples were at their lowest point.** This dire situation in both in population and possibility for survival was caused by decades of violent military operations during and following the Civil War, along with federal theft of Indigenous treaty-guaranteed funds and then two decades of allotment of Indigenous lands. 
* "Then the US government imposed unsolicited citizenship on American Indians with the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, gesturing toward assimilation and dissolving the nations. **It was a boom time for the national economy, but life threatening for Native Americans everywhere.** 
* "Robert Spott of the Yurok Nation in Northern California, also an army veteran of World War I, described his community's situation, which could have been applied to every Native community. Speaking before the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco in 1926, he said:
	> *There are many Indian women that are almost blind, and they only have one meal a day, because there is no one to look after them. **Most of these people used to live on fish, which they cannot get, and on acorns, and they are starving.** They hardly have any clothing to cover them. **Many children up along the Klamath River have passed away with disease. Most of them from tuberculosis.** There is no road into there where the Indians are. The only road they have got is the Klamath River.*
	>
	> *To reach doctors they have to take their children down the Klamath River to the mouth of the Klamath. It is 24 miles to Crescent City, where we have to go for doctors. It costs us $25. Where are the poor Indians to get this money from to get a doctor for their children? **They go from place to place to borrow money. If they cannot get it, the poor child dies without aid.** Inside of four or five years more there will be hardly any Indians left upon the Klamath River.*
	>	
	> *I came here to notify you that something has to be done. We must have a doctor, and we must have a school to educate our children, and we must have a road upon the Klamath River besides the bank of the river.*
	>
	> *My father was an Indian chief, and we used to own everything there. When the land was allotted they allotted him only ten acres, a little farm of land which is mostly gravel and rock, with little scrubby trees and redwood...*
	>
	> *Often we see a car go past. It is the Indian Service. Do you suppose the man driving that car would stop? Always he has no time for the Indians, and the car with some one from the U.S.A. Indian Service goes past just like a tourist.*
* "Natives joined African-Americans, Mexican-Americans, and Chinese immigrants as targets of individual racial discrimination between the end of Reconstruction in the South (1880s) to the mid-twentieth century. Jim Crow segregation reigned in the South, where more than five thousand African Americans were lynched. As Black people fled terror and impoverishment in the South, their populations grew in northern and midwestern cities where they still faced discrimination and violence. Chicago, Tulsa, and dozens of other cities were marred by deadly 'race riots' against African Americans. 
* "The virulent and organized racism of the 1920s spilled over to other peoples of darker hue. The pseudoscience of eugenics and racial purity was more robust in the United States than in Europe, further solidifying the ideology of white supremacy. For Indigenous peoples, this was manifest in development of US government policy measuring 'blood quantum' in order to qualify for Indigenousness, replacing culture (especially language) and self-identification. While African Americans were classified as such by the measure of 'one drop of blood,' Indigenous people were increasingly called to prove their degree of ancestry as a significant fraction.

### New Deal to Termination p.170
* "Some relief for Indigenous nations came with the 1930s New Deal. The Roosevelt administration's programs to combat economic collapse included an acknowledgment of Indigenous self-determination. *Roosevelt appointed **anthropologist and self-identified socialist John Collier** as US commissioner of Indian affairs in 1933.* 
* "As a young activist scholar in 1922, Collier had been hired by the General Federation of Women's Clubs to assist the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico in their land-claims struggle, a project that culminated in success when Congress passed the 1924 Pueblo Lands Act. 
* "Having lived at Taos Pueblo, whose residents practiced traditional lifeways, Collier had developed respect for the communal social relations he observed in Indigenous communities and had confidence that these peoples could govern themselves successfully and even influence a move toward socialism in the United States. 
* "Collier understood and agreed with Indigenous opposition to assimilation as individuals into the general society--what the ongoing allotment in severalty of Native collective estates and the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 sought to institutionalize.
* "As commissioner for Indian affairs, in consultation with Native communities, Collier drafted and successfully lobbied for passage of the Wheeler-Howard bill, which became the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of 1934. One of its provisions was to end further allotment of Indigenous territories, which was immediately implemented, although already allotted land was not restored. 
* "Another provision committed the federal government to purchase available land contiguous to reservations in order to restore lands to relevant Native nations. The IRA's main provision was more controversial with Indigenous peoples, calling for the formation of 'tribal governments.' 
* "In a gesture toward self-determination, the IRA did not require any Indigenous nation to accept the law's terms, and several, including the Navajo Nation, declined. The IRA was limited in that it did not apply to the relocated Native nations in Oklahoma; separate legislation was later drawn up for their unique circumstances.
* "The Navajo Nation, with the largest land base and population among Indigenous peoples in the United States, soundly rejected signing off on the IRA. The Great Depression of the 1930s was, in the words of postwar Navajo chairman Sam Ankeah, 'the most devastating experience in [Navajo] history since the imprisonment at Fort Sumner from 1864-1868.' 
* "When Collier became commissioner in 1933, he pushed for reduction of Navajo sheep and goats as part of a larger New Deal conservation scheme to stem stock overgrazing. He badgered the twelve Navajo Council members into accepting the reduction, promising unlikely new jobs under the Civilian Conservation Corps to replace lost income.
* "Collier suggested, without basis, that soil erosion in the Navajo Reservation was responsible for the silting up of the Boulder Dam site. **His action likely was influenced by agribusinesses that wanted to get rid of all small producers in order to create an advantage to Anglo settler ranchers in New Mexico and Arizona.** *The process is still bitterly remembered by Navajos.* 
* "**With traumatized Navajos watching, government agents shot sheep and goats and left them to rot or cremated them after dousing them with gasoline.** At one site alone, thirty-five goats were shot and left to rot. **One hundred fifty thousand goats and fifty thousand sheep were killed in this manner.** 
* "Oral history interviews tell of the pressure tactics on the Navajos, including arrests of those who resisted, and express bitterness over the destruction of their livestock. As Navajo Council member Howard Gorman said: 
	> *All of these incidents broke a lot of hearts of the Navajo people and left them mourning for years. They didn't like it that the sheep were killed; it was a total waste. That is what the people said. **To many of them livestock was a necessity and meant survival. Some people consider livestock as sacred because it is life's necessity. They think of livestock as their mother.** The cruel way our stock was handled is something that should never have happened.*
* "In addition to the trauma experienced by the Navajos, the effect of the reductions was to impoverish the owners of small herds.
* "For those Native nations, the majority, that did accept the Indian Reorganization Act, **a negative consequence was that English-speaking Native elites--often aligned with Christian denominations--signed on to the law and formed authoritarian governments that enriched a few families and undermined communal traditions and traditional forms of governance**. This problem persists to today. However, the IRA did end allotment and **set a precedent for acknowledging Indigenous self-determination and recognizing collective cultural rights, a legal reality that made it difficult for those who sought to undo the incipient empowerment of Indigenous peoples in the 1950s.**
* "The Truman administration pushed out John Collier, among many other progressive Roosevelt appointees. Following the end of World War II, **attitudes among the ruling class and Congress regarding Indigenous nations turned from supporting autonomy to their elimination as peoples with a new regimen of individual assimilation**. In 1946 **Congress established the Indian Claims Commission and the Indian Claims Court to legitimize the prior illegal federal taking of Indigenous treaty lands**. 
* "Between 1946 and 1952--the cutoff date for filing claims--370 petitions representing 850 claims were filed on behalf of Indigenous nations. 
* "**Although the government's stated purpose was to clear title for lands illegally taken, the claims mechanism barred restitution of lands taken illegally or acquiring new ones to replace the loss. Settlement was limited to monetary compensation based on the property's value at the time of the taking, and without interest.** 
* "Adding insult to injury, *any expenditure made by the federal government on behalf of the Indigenous nations making claims was subtracted from the overall award, **thereby penalizing the Indigenous people for services they had not requested***. The average interval between filing a claim and receiving an award was fifteen years.
* "In creating the Indian Claims Commission, Congress was acknowledging the fact that the federal government had illegally seized Indigenous lands guaranteed by treaties. **That validation became useful in Indigenous strategies for strengthening sovereignty and pursuing restitution of the land rather than monetary compensation.** 
* "On the other hand, **the process became a stepping-stone to ending federal acknowledgment of Indigenous nations altogether**. *The Eisenhower administration lost no time in collaborating with Congress to weaken federal trust responsibility, transferring Indian education to the states and moving Indian health care from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the Department of Health.*
* "This policy trend toward assimilation culminated in the Termination Act (House Concurrent Resolution 108) in 1953, which provided--in Orwellian language--that Congress should, 'as quickly as possible, move to free those tribes listed from Federal supervision and control and from all disabilities and limitations specially applicable to Indians'. 
* "Under termination, the federal trust protection and transfer payments guaranteed by treaties and agreements would end. **Dillon S. Myer, who had headed the War Relocation Authority that administered the concentration camps for US citizens of Japanese descent, was, significantly, the Eisenhower administration's commissioner of Indian affairs to implement termination.** 
* "*Commissioner Myer noted that **Indigenous consent was immaterial***, saying, 'We must proceed even though Indian cooperation may be lacking in certain cases.' In the same year, Congress imposed Public Law 280 that **transferred police power on reservations from the federal government to the states**.
* "Despite the piecemeal eating away of Indigenous landholdings and sovereignty and federal trust responsibility based on treaties, **the US government had no constitutional or other legal authority to deprive federally recognized Native nations of their inherent sovereignty or territorial boundaries**. 
* "It could only make it nearly impossible for them to exercise that sovereignty. **Or, alternatively, eliminate Indigenous identity entirely through assimilation, a form of genocide.** The latter was the goal of the 1956 Indian Relocation Act (Public Law 949). 
* "With BIA funding, any Indigenous individual or family could relocate to designated urban industrial areas--the San Francisco Bay Area, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Dallas, Denver, Cleveland--where BIA offices were established to make housing and job training and placement available. 
* "This project gave rise to large Native urban populations scattered among already poor and struggling minority working-class communities, holding low-skilled jobs or dealing with long-term unemployment. Yet many of these mostly young migrants were influenced by the civil rights movement emerging in cities in the 1950s and 1960s and began their own distinct intertribal movements organized around the urban American Indian centers they established. **In one of the largest of the relocation destinations, the San Francisco Bay Area, this would culminate in the eighteen-month occupation of Alcatraz in the late 1960s.**

### Civil Rights Era Begins p.175

* "**The founding of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) in 1944 had marked a surge of Indigenous resistance.** An extraordinary group of Native leaders emerged in the 1950s, including D'Arcy McNickle (Flathead), Edward Dozier (Santa Clara Pueblo), Helen Peterson (Northern Cheyenne/Lakota), and dozens of others from diverse nations. 
* "Without their efforts, the termination period would have been more damaging than it was, possibly ending Indigenous status altogether. As a result of their organizing, the government ceased enforcing termination in 1961, though the legislation remained on the books until its repeal in 1988. 
* "**However, by 1960, more than a hundred Indigenous nations had been terminated.** A few were later able to regain federal trusteeship through protracted court battles and demonstrations, which took decades and financial hardship. 
* "Indigenous leaders such as Ada Deer and James White of the terminated Menominee Nation played key roles in the struggle to have Indigenous cases heard by Congress and by the Supreme Court in suits and appeals. The restitution movement attracted publicity through community organizing and direct action. 
* "Postwar Indigenous resistance operated in relation to a United States far wealthier and more powerful than before, but also within the era of decolonization and human rights inaugurated with establishment of the United Nations and adoption of its Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in 1948. **Native leaders paid attention and were inspired.**
* "Native organizing, like the organization of the African American desegregation and voting rights movement, developed within the context of a nationalistic anticommunist ideology that intensified with the Cold War and nuclear arms race in the 1950s. **This second great Red Scare--the first had been in the wake of World War I--targeted the labor movement under the guise of combating the "communist threat" from the Soviet Union.**
* "The Second Red Scare also attacked the civil rights and self-determination movements of the period, and racism broadened and flourished. The wars against Japan and then Korea, along with the successful Chinese communist revolution, revived the early-twentieth-century racist fear of a 'yellow peril'. **Mexican migrant workers largely replaced the Asian agricultural workers displaced by the Japanese American internment, but in 1953 'Operation Wetback', as the federal program was called, forced the deportation of more than a million Mexican workers, in the process subjecting millions of US citizens of Mexican heritage to illegal search and arrest.**
* "**Native Americans continued to experience brutality, including rape and detention in the border towns on the edges of reservation lands, at the hands of citizens as well as law enforcement officials.** *The situation of African Americans was one of continued legalized segregation in the South, and extralegal but open discrimination elsewhere.* 
* "Then, thanks to the long and hard work of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1954, the US Supreme Court ordered desegregation of public schools. Years of persistent and little-publicized civil rights organizing, particularly in the South, burst into public view with the bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955. **The white response was murderous:** a well-funded campaign by White Citizens' Councils that formed all over the country, accusing civil rights activists of communist influence and infiltration. **When white vigilantes bombed and burned Black churches, it was said that 'the communists' were doing it to gain sympathy for integration.**
* "As **national liberation movements** surged in European colonies in Africa and Asia, the United States responded with counterinsurgency. The US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was formed in 1947 and expanded in size and global reach during the Eisenhower administration under director Allen Dulles, brother of Eisenhower's secretary of state, John Foster Dulles. 
* "**The CIA instrumentalized the overthrow of the democratically elected governments of Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954.** 
* "**Guatemala had been the leading light in developing the Inter-American Indian Institute,** a 1940 treaty-based initiative that Dave Warren and D'Arcy McNickle were involved with. **Following the coup, the institute headquarters relocated from Guatemala City to Mexico City, but there it no longer had the same clout.** Covert action came to be the primary means of counterinsurgency, while military invasion remained an option as in Vietnam following a decade of covert counterinsurgency there. 
* "In the buildup to the US war in Vietnam, **the CIA set the stage with its 'secret war' in Laos, organizing the indigenous Hmong as a CIA-sponsored army**. After Iran and Guatemala, the CIA engineered coups in Indonesia, the Congo, Greece, and Chile, while attempting assassinations or coups that failed in Cuba, Iraq, Laos, and other countries.
* "Two years before John F. Kennedy took office as president of the United States, the Cuban people, after decades of struggle and years of urban and rural organizing and guerrilla war, deposed the corrupt and despised dictator Batista, who had been financed and supported by the United States to the bitter end. 
* "The **CIA spent the next several years trying to assassinate revolutionary leader Fidel Castro and made many attempts to invade, the most infamous of which was the 1961 Bay of Pigs fiasco**. Many Cubans who left Cuba for the United States after the revolution were recruited as CIA operatives. 
* **"The revolution in Cuba, just ninety miles off the Florida coast, would be a touchstone for increasingly radicalized young people in the United States, but even more so for the Indigenous peoples of Latin America, which resonated with Native American activists seeking self-determination to their north."**

-------

## Chapter 10: Ghost Dance Prophecy p.178

### The New Frontier

* "Seventy years after the Wounded Knee Massacre, when the conquest of the continent was said to have been complete, and with Hawai'i and Alaska made into states, rounding out the fifty stars on today's flag, **the myth of an exceptional US American people destined to bring order out of chaos, to stimulate economic growth, and to replace savagery with civilization--not just in North America but throughout the world--proved to have enormous staying power.**
* "A key to John F. Kennedy's political success was that he revived the 'frontier' as a trope of **populist imperialism openly based on the drama and popular myth of 'settling' the continent, of 'taming' a different sort of 'wilderness'**. 
* "In Kennedy's acceptance speech at the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, historian Richard Slotkin writes, the presidential nominee 'asked his audience to see him as a new kind of frontiersman confronting a different sort of wilderness: *I stand tonight facing west on what was once the last frontier. From the lands that stretch 3000 miles behind me, the pioneers of old gave up their safety, their comfort, and sometimes their lives to build a new world here in the West...We stand today on the edge of a new frontier...a frontier of unknown opportunities and paths, a frontier for unfulfilled hopes and threats.*'
* "Kennedy's use of 'new frontier' to encapsulate his campaign echoed debates about US history that had begun more than six decades earlier. **In 1894, historian Frederick Jackson Turner had presented his history-making 'frontier thesis', claiming that the crisis of that era was the result of the closing of the frontier and that a new frontier was needed to fill the ideological and spiritual vacuum created by the completion of settler colonialism. The *Turner Thesis* served as a dominant school of the history of the US West through most of the twentieth century.**
* "The frontier metaphor described Kennedy's plan for employing political power to make the world the new frontier of the United States. Central to this vision was the Cold War, what Slotkin calls 'a heroic engagement in the *long twilight struggle*' against communism, to which the nation was summoned, as Kennedy characterized it in his inaugural address. Soon after he took office, that struggle took the form of a counterinsurgency program in Vietnam. 
* "'Seven years after Kennedy's nomination', Slotkin reminds us, **'American troops would be describing Vietnam as *Indian Country* and search-and-destroy missions as a game of *Cowboys and Indians*; and Kennedy's ambassador to Vietnam would justify a massive military escalation by citing the necessity of moving the "Indians" away from the "fort" so that the "settlers" could "plant corn".'**
* "The movement of Indigenous peoples to undo what generations of 'frontier' expansionists had wrought continued during the Vietnam War era and won some major victories. **But more importantly the movement created a shift in consensus, will, and vision toward self-determination and land restitution, which prevails today.** 
* "Activists' efforts to end termination and secure restoration of land, particularly sacred sites, included *Taos Pueblo's **sixty-four-year struggle with the US government** to reclaim their sacred Blue Lake in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains of New Mexico*. 
* "**In the first land restitution to any Indigenous nation**, President Richard M. Nixon signed into effect Public Law 91-550 on December 15, 1970, which had been approved with bipartisan majorities in Congress. President Nixon stated, 'This is a bill that **represents justice, because in 1906 an injustice was done in which land involved in this bill--48,000 acres--was taken from the Taos Pueblo Indians. The Congress of the United States now returns that land to whom it belongs**.'
* "In hearings held in the preceding years by the Senate Subcommittee on Indian Affairs, **members expressed fear of establishing a precedent in awarding land-based on ancient use, treaties, or aboriginal ownership--rather than monetary payment**. 
* "As one witness testifying in opposition to the return of Taos lands said, 'The history of the land squabbles in New Mexico among various groups of people, including Indian-Americans and Spanish Americans, is well known. Substantially every acre of our public domain, be it national forest, state parks, or wilderness areas is threatened by claims from various groups who say they have some ancestral right to the land to the exclusion of all other persons...which can only be fostered and encouraged by the present legislation if passed.'
* "**Although the Senate subcommittee members finally agreed to the Taos claim by satisfying themselves that it was unique, it did in fact set a precedent. The return of Blue Lake as a sacred site begs the question of whether other Indigenous sacred sites remaining as national or state parks or as US Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management lands and waterways should also be returned.** 
* "Administration of the Grand Canyon National Park has been partially restored to its ancestral caretakers, the Havasupai Nation, but other federal lands have not. A few sites, such as the volcanic El Malpais, a sacred site for the Pueblo Indians, have been designated as national monuments by executive order rather than restored as Indigenous territory. *The most prominent struggle has been the Lakota Sioux's attempt to restore the Paha Sapa, or Black Hills, where the odious Mount Rushmore carvings have scarred the sacred site. Called the 'Shrine of Democracy' by the federal government, it is anything but that; rather it is **a shrine of in-your-face illegal occupation and colonialism**.*"

### Resurgence p. 181

* "**The return of Taos Blue Lake was not a gift from above.** In addition to the six-decade struggle of Taos Pueblo, the restitution took place in the midst of a renewed powerful and growing Native American struggle for self-determination. 
* "The movement's energy was evident when twenty-six young Native activists and students founded the National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) in 1961, based in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
* "From twenty-one different Native nations, some from reservations or small towns and others from relocated families far from home, the founders included Gloria Emerson and Herb Blatchford (both Navajo), Clyde Warrior (Ponca from Oklahoma), Mel Thom (Paiute from Nevada), and Shirley Hill Witt (Mohawk). 
* "Cherokee anthropologist Robert K. Thomas mentored the militant young activists. *Although primarily committed to local struggles, their vision was international. As Shirley Hill Witt put it: 'At a time when new nations all over the globe are emerging from colonial control, their right to choose their own course places a vast burden of responsibility upon the most powerful nations to honor and protect those rights...The Indians of the United States may well present the test case of American liberalism.'*
* "In 1964, the NIYC organized support for the ongoing Indigenous struggle to protect treaty-guaranteed fishing rights in Washington State. Actor Marlon Brando took an interest and provided financial support and publicity. The 'fish-in' movement soon put the tiny community at Frank's Landing in the headlines. Sid Mills was arrested there on October 13, 1968. Eloquently, he explained his actions:
	> *I am a Yakima and Cherokee Indian, and a man. For two years and four months, I've been a soldier in the United States Army. I served in combat in Vietnam--until critically wounded...I hereby renounce further obligation in service or duty to the United States Army.*
	>
	> *My first obligation now lies with the Indian People fighting for the lawful Treaty to fish in usual and accustomed wa­ ter of the Nisqually, Columbia and other rivers of the Pacific Northwest, and in serving them in this fight in any way possible...*
	>
	> *Just three years ago today, on October 13, 1965, 19 women and children were brutalized by more than 45 armed agents of the State of Washington at Frank's Landing on the Nisqually river in a vicious, unwarranted attack...*
	>
	> *Interestingly, the oldest human skeletal remains ever found in the Western Hemisphere were recently uncovered on the banks of the Columbia River--the remains of Indian fishermen. What kind of government or society would spend millions of dollars to pick upon our bones, restore our ancestral life patterns, and protect our ancient remains from damage--while at the same time eating upon the flesh of our living People?*
	>
	> *We will fight for our rights.*
* "Hank Adams with other local leaders founded **the Survival of American Indians Association, which was composed of the Swin­ omish, Nisqually, Yakama, Puyallup, Stilaguamish, and other Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest to carry on the fishing-rights struggle**. 
* "The backlash from Anglo sport fishers was swift and violent, but in 1973 fourteen of the fishing nations sued Washington State, and, in a reflection of changed times, **the following year US District Court Judge George Boldt found in their favor**. He validated their right to 50 percent of fish taken 'in the usual and accustomed places' that were designated in the 1850s treaties, even where those places were not under tribal control. **This was a landmark decision for historical Indigenous sovereignty over territories outside designated reservation boundaries**.
* "The NIYC saw itself as an engine for igniting local organizing, marshaling community organizing projects with access to funds from the Johnson administration's 'War on Poverty,' the mandate of which was to implement the principles of economic and social equality intended by authors of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
* "Interethnic alliances, including a significant representation of Native peoples, developed during the mid-1960's. Campaign spearheaded by the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., which consisted of community organizing and leading marches across the country. 
* "In the final month of campaign planning, Dr. King was assassinated on April 4, 1968. Thousands of marchers arrived in Washington, DC, in the next month and gathered in a tent city, then remained there for six weeks.
* "While local actions multiplied in Native communities and nations, **the spectacular November 1969 seizure and eighteen-month occupation of Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay grabbed wide media attention**. An alliance known as Indians of All Tribes was initiated by Native American students and community members living in the Bay Area. 
* "They built a thriving village on the island that drew Native pilgrimages from all over the continent, radicalizing thousands, especially Native youth. Indigenous women leaders were particularly impressive, among them Madonna Thunderhawk, LaNada Means War Jack, Rayna Ramirez, and many others who continued organizing into the twenty-first century. **The Proclamation of the In­ dians of All Tribes expressed the level of Indigenous solidarity that was attained and the joyful good humor that ruled:**
	> * We, the Native Americans, reclaim the land known as Alcatraz Island in the name of all American Indians by right of discovery.*
	>
	> *We wish to be fair and honorable in our dealings with the Caucasian inhabitants of this land, and hereby offer the following treaty:*
	>
	> *We will purchase said Alcatraz Island for twenty-four dollars (24) in glass beads and red cloth--a precedent set by the white man's purchase of a similar island about 300 years ago.*
	>
	> *We will give to the inhabitants of this island a portion of the land for their own to be held in trust by the American Indians Government and by the bureau of Caucasian Affairs to hold in perpetuity--for as long as the sun shall rise and the rivers go down to the sea. **We will further guide the inhabitants in the proper way of living.** We will offer them our religion, our education, our life-ways, in order to help them achieve our level of civilization and thus raise them and all their white brothers up from their savage and unhappy state...*
	>
	> *Further, it would be fitting and symbolic that ships from all over the world--entering the Golden Gate--would first see Indian land, and thus be reminded of the true history of this nation. This tiny island would be a symbol of the great lands once ruled by free and noble Indians.*
	>
* "Despite the satirical riff on the history of US colonialism, **the group made serious demands for five institutions to be established on Alcatraz: a Center for Native American Studies; an American Indian Spiritual Center; an Indian Center of Ecology that would do scientific research on reversing pollution of water and air; a Great Indian Training School that would run a restaurant, provide job training, market Indigenous arts, and teach 'the noble and tragic events of Indian history, including the Trail of Tears, and the Massacre of Wounded Knee'; and a memorial, a reminder that the island had been established as a prison initially to incarcerate and execute California Indian resisters to US assault on their nations.**
* "Under orders from the Nixon White House, the Indigenous residents remaining on Alcatraz were forced to evacuate in June 1971. **Indigenous professors Jack Forbes and David Risling, who were in the process of establishing a Native American studies program at the University of California, Davis, negotiated a grant from the federal government of unused land near Davis, where the institutions demanded by Alcatraz occupants could be established.**
* "A two­year Native-American-Chicano college and movement center, D-Q (Deganawidah-Quetzalcoatl) University, was founded, while UC Davis became the first US university to offer a doctorate in Native American studies.
* "During this period of intense protest and activism, alliances among Indigenous governments--including the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) led by young Sioux attorney Vine Deloria Jr.--turned militant demands into legislation. 
* "A year before the seizure of Alcatraz, **Ojibwe activists Dennis Banks and Clyde Bellecourt founded the American Indian Movement (AIM)**, which initially patrolled the streets around Indigenous housing projects in Minneapolis. Going national, AIM became involved at Alcatraz. 
* "With the rather bitter end of the island occupation, as Paul Smith and Robert Warrior write: 'The future of Indian activism would belong to people far angrier than the student brigades of Alcatraz. Urban Indians who managed a life beyond the bottles of cheap wine cruelly named Thunderbird would continue down the protest road.'
* "With the Vietnam War still raging and the reelection of Richard Nixon in November 1972 imminent, a coalition of eight Indigenous organizations--AIM, the National Indian Brotherhood of Canada (later renamed Assembly of First Nations), the Native American Rights Fund, the National Indian Youth Council, the National American Indian Council, the National Council on Indian Work, National Indian Leadership Training, and the American Indian Committee on Alcohol and Drug Abuse--**organized 'The Trail of Broken Treaties'**. 
* "Armed with a '20-Point Position Paper' that focused on the federal government's responsibility to implement Indigenous treaties and sovereignty, caravans set out in the fall of 1972. The vehicles and numbers of participants multiplied at each stop, converging in Washington, DC, one week before the presidential election. 
* "Hanging a banner from the front of the Bureau of Indian Affairs building that proclaimed it to be the 'Native American Embassy,' **hundreds of protesters hailing from seventy-five Indigenous nations entered the building to sit in**. BIA personnel, at the time largely non-Indigenous, fled, and the capitol police chain-locked the doors announcing that the Indigenous protesters were illegally occupying the building. 
* "The protesters stayed for six days, enough time for them to read damning federal documents that revealed gross mismanagement of the federal trust responsibility, which they boxed up and took with them. The Trail of Broken Treaties solidified Indigenous alliances, and the '20-Point Position Paper'--the work mainly of Hank Adams--provided a template for the affinity of hundreds of Native organizations. **Five years later, in 1977, the document would be presented to the United Nations, forming the basis for the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.**
* "Three months after the BIA building takeover, Oglala Lakota traditional people at the Pine Ridge Sioux Reservation in South Dakota invited the American Indian Movement to assist them in halting collusion between their tribal government--formed under the terms of the Indian Reorganization Act--and the federal government that had crushed the people and further impoverished them. 
* "The people opposed the increasingly authoritarian reign of the elected tribal chairman, Richard Wilson. They invited AIM to send a delegation to support them. On February 27, 1973, long deliberations took place in the Pine Ridge Calico Hall between the local people and AIM leaders, led by Russell Means, a citizen of Pine Ridge. 
* "The AIM activists were well known following the Trail of Broken Treaties Caravan, and upon AIM's arrival, **the FBI, tribal police, and the chairman's armed special unit, the Guardians of the Oglala Nation (they called themselves "the GOON squad"), mobilized.**
* "The meeting ended with a consensus decision to go to Wounded Knee in a caravan to protest the chairman's misdeeds and the violence of his GOONs. The law enforcement contingent followed and circled the protesters. **Over the following days, hundreds of more armed men surrounded Wounded Knee, and so began a two-and-a-half-month siege of protesters at the 1890 massacre site.** 
* "The late-twentieth century hamlet of Wounded Knee was made up of little more than a trading post, a Catholic church, and the mass grave of the hundreds of Lakotas slaughtered in 1890. Now armed personnel carriers, Huey helicopters, and military snipers surrounded the site, while supply teams of mostly Lakota women made their way through the military lines and back out again through dark of night."

### Wounded Knee 1890 and 1973 p.186

* "The period between the 'closing of the frontier', marked by the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, and the 1973 siege of Wounded Knee, which marks the beginning of Indigenous decolonization in North America, is illuminated by following the historical experience of the Sioux. 
* "The first international relationship between the Sioux Nation and the US government was established in 1805 with a treaty of peace and friendship two years after the United States acquired the Louisiana Territory, which included the Sioux Nation among many other Indigenous nations. 
* "Other such treaties followed in 1815 and 1825. These peace treaties had no immediate effect on Sioux political autonomy or territory. By 1834, competition in the fur trade, with the market dominated by the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, led the Oglala Sioux to move away from the Upper Missouri to the Upper Platte near Fort Laramie. 
* "By 1846, seven thousand Sioux had moved south. Thomas Fitzpatrick, the Indian agent in 1846, recommended that the United States purchase land to establish a fort, which became Fort Laramie. 'My opinion,' Fitzpatrick wrote, 'is that a post at, or in the vicinity of Laramie is much wanted, it would be nearly in the center of the buffalo range, where all the formidable Indian tribes are fast approaching, and near where there will eventually be a struggle for the ascendancy [in the fur trade].' Fitzpatrick believed that a garrison of at least three hundred soldiers would be necessary to keep the Indians under control.
* "Although the Sioux and the United States redefined their relationship in the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1851, this was followed by a decade of war between the two parties, ending with the Peace Treaty of Fort Laramie in 1868. Both of these treaties--though not reducing Sioux political sovereignty--ceded large parts of Sioux territory by establishing mutually recognized boundaries, and the Sioux granted concessions to the United States that gave legal color to the Sioux's increasing economic dependency on the United States and its economy. 
* "During the half century before the 1851 treaty, the Sioux had been gradually enveloped in the fur trade and had become dependent on horses and European-manufactured guns, ammunition, iron cookware, tools, textiles, and other items of trade that replaced their traditional crafts. On the plains the Sioux gradually abandoned farming and turned entirely to bison hunting for their subsistence and for trade. This increased dependency on the buffalo in turn brought deeper dependency on guns and ammunition that had to be purchased with more hides, creating the vicious circle that characterized modern colonialism. 
* "With the balance of power tipped by mid-century, US traders and the military exerted pressure on the Sioux for land cessions and rights of way as the buffalo population decreased. The hardships for the Sioux caused by constant attacks on their villages, forced movement, and resultant disease and starvation took a toll on their strength to resist domination. 
* "They entered into the 1868 treaty with the United States on strong terms from a military standpoint--the Sioux remained an effective guerrilla fighting force through the 1880s, never defeated by the US army--but their dependency on buffalo and on trade allowed for escalated federal control when buffalo were purposely exterminated by the army between 1870 and 1876. After that the Sioux were fighting for survival.
* "Economic dependency on buffalo and trade was replaced with survival dependency on the US government for rations and commodities guaranteed in the 1868 treaty. The agreement stipulated that 'no treaty for the cession of any portion or part of the reser­ vation herein described which may be held in common shall be of any validation or force against the said Indians, unless executed and signed by at least three fourths of all the adult male Indians.' 
* "Nevertheless, in 1876, with no such validation, and with the discovery of gold by Custer's Seventh Cavalry, the US government seized the Black Hills--Paha Sapa--a large, resource-rich portion of the treaty-guaranteed Sioux territory, the center of the great Sioux Nation, a religious shrine and sanctuary. 
* "When the Sioux surrendered after the wars of 1876-77, they lost not only the Black Hills but also the Powder River country. The next US move was to change the western boundary of the Sioux Nation, whose territory, though atrophied from its original, was a contiguous block. 
* "By 1877, after the army drove the Sioux out of Nebraska, all that was left was a block between the 103rd meridian and the Missouri, thirty-five thousand square miles of land the United States had designated as Dakota Territory (the next step toward statehood, in this case the states of North and South Dakota). 
* "The first of several waves of northern European immigrants now poured into eastern Dakota Territory, pressing against the Missouri River boundary of the Sioux. At the Anglo-American settlement of Bismarck on the Missouri, the westward-pushing Northern Pacific Railroad was blocked by the reservation. 
* "Settlers bound for Montana and the Pacific Northwest called for trails to be blazed and defended across the reservation. Promoters who wanted cheap land to sell at high prices to immigrants schemed to break up the reservation. Except for the Sioux units that continued to fight, the majority of the Sioux people were unarmed, had no horses, and were unable even to feed and clothe themselves, dependent upon government rations.
* "Next came allotment. Before the Dawes Act was even implemented, a government commission arrived in Sioux territory from Washington, DC, in 1888 with a proposal to reduce the Sioux Nation to six small reservations, a scheme that would leave nine million acres open for Euro-American settlement. 
* "**The commission found it impossible to obtain signatures of the required three-fourths of the nation as required under the 1868 treaty, and so returned to Washington with a recommendation that the government ignore the treaty and take the land without Sioux consent.** The only means to accomplish that goal was legislation, Congress having relieved the government of the obligation to negotiate a treaty. 
* "Congress commissioned General George Crook to head a delegation to try again, this time with an offer of $1.50 per acre. In a series of manipulations and dealings with leaders whose people were now starving, the commission garnered the needed signatures. 
* "The great Sioux Nation was broken into small islands soon surrounded on all sides by European immigrants, with much of the reservation land a checkerboard with settlers on allotments or leased land. Creating these isolated reservations broke the historical relationships between clans and communities of the Sioux Nation and opened areas where Europeans settled. 
* "It also allowed the Bureau of Indian Affairs to exercise tighter control, buttressed by the bureau's boarding school system. The Sun Dance, the annual ceremony that had brought Sioux together and reinforced national unity, was outlawed, along with other religious ceremonies. 
* "Despite the Sioux people's weak position under late-nineteenth-century colonial domination, they managed to begin building a modest cattle-ranching business to replace their former bison-hunting economy. In 1903, the US Supreme Court ruled, in *Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock*, that a March 3 , 1871, appropriations rider was constitutional and that Congress had 'plenary' power to manage Indian property. 
* "The Office of Indian Affairs could thus dispose of Indian lands and resources regardless of the terms of previous treaty provisions. Legislation followed that opened the reservations to settlement through leasing and even sale of allotments taken out of trust. Nearly all prime grazing lands came to be occupied by non-Indian ranchers by the 1920s.
* "**By the time of the New Deal-Collier era and nullification of Indian land allotment under the Indian Reorganization Act, non-Indians outnumbered Indians on the Sioux reservations three to one.** However, the drought of the mid- to late-1930s drove many settler ranchers off Sioux land, and the Sioux purchased some of that land, which had been theirs. 
* "However, 'tribal governments' imposed in the wake of the Indian Reorganization Act proved particularly harmful and divisive for the Sioux. Concerning this measure, the late Mathew King, elder traditional historian of the Oglala Sioux (Pine Ridge), observed: 'The Bureau of Indian Affairs drew up the constitution and by-laws of this organization with the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. This was the introduction of home rule...The traditional people still hang on to their Treaty, for we are a sovereign nation. We have our own government.' 
* "'Home rule', or neocolonialism, proved a short-lived policy, however, for in the early 1950s the United States developed its termination policy, with legislation ordering gradual eradication of every reservation and even the tribal governments. 
* "At the time of termination and relocation, per capita annual income on the Sioux reservations stood at $355, while that in nearby South Dakota towns was $2,500. Despite these circumstances, in pursuing its termination policy, the Bureau of Indian Affairs advocated the reduction of services and introduced its program to relocate Indians to urban industrial centers, **with a high percentage of Sioux moving to San Francisco and Denver in search of jobs**.
* "Mathew King has described the United States throughout its history as alternating between a 'peace' policy and a 'war' policy in its relations with Indigenous nations and communities, saying that these pendulum swings coincided with the strength and weakness of Native resistance. 
* "Between the alternatives of extermination and termination (war policies) and preservation (peace policy), King argued, were interim periods characterized by benign neglect and assimilation. With organized Indigenous resistance to war programs and policies, concessions are granted. 
* "When pressure lightens, new schemes are developed to separate Indians from their land, resources, and cultures. Scholars, politicians, policymakers, and the media rarely term US policy toward Indigenous peoples as colonialism. **King, however, believed that his people's country had been a colony of the United States since 1890.**
* "The logical progression of modern colonialism begins with economic penetration and graduates to a sphere of influence, then to protectorate status or indirect control, military occupation, and finally annexation. This corresponds to the process experienced by the Sioux people in relation to the United States. 
* "The economic penetration of fur traders brought the Sioux within the US sphere of influence. The transformation of Fort Laramie from a trading post, the center of Sioux trade, to a US Army outpost in the mid-nineteenth century indicates the integral relationship between trade and colonial control. 
* "Growing protectorate status established through treaties culminated in the 1868 Sioux treaty, followed by military occupation achieved by extreme exemplary violence, such as at Wounded Knee in 1890, and finally dependency. 
* "Annexation by the United States is marked symbolically by the imposition of US citizenship on the Sioux (and most other Indians) in 1924. Mathew King and other traditional Sioux saw the siege of Wounded Knee in 1973 as a turning point, although the violent backlash that followed was harsh.
* "Two decades of collective Indigenous resistance culminating at Wounded Knee in 1973 defeated the 1950s federal termination policy. **Yet proponents of the disappearance of Indigenous nations seem never to tire of trying.** 
* "Another move toward termination developed in 1977 with dozens of congressional bills to abrogate all Indian treaties and terminate all Indian governments and trust territories. **Indigenous resistance defeated those initiatives as well, with another caravan across the country.** 
* "Like colonized peoples elsewhere in the world, the Sioux have been involved in decolonization efforts since the mid-twentieth century. Wounded Knee in 1973 was part of this struggle, as was their involvement in UN committees and international forums. 
* "However, in the early twenty-first century, free-market fundamentalist economists and politicians identified the communally owned Indigenous reservation lands as an asset to be exploited and, under the guise of helping to end Indigenous poverty on those reservations, call for doing away with them-a new extermination and termination initiative.

### 'Indian Wars' as a Template for The United States in The World p.192

* "The integral link between Wounded Knee in 1890 and Wounded Knee in 1973 suggests a long-overdue reinterpretation of Indigenous-US relations as a template for US imperialism and counterinsurgency wars. As Vietnam veteran and author Michael Herr observed, we 'might as well say that Vietnam was where the Trail of Tears was headed all along, the turnaround point where it would touch and come back to form a containing perimeter.' 
* "Seminole Nation Vietnam War veteran Evan Haney made the comparison in testifying at the Winter Soldier Investigations: 'The same massacres happened to the Indians...I got to know the Vietnamese people and I learned they were just like us...I have grown up with racism all my life. **When I was a child, watching cowboys and Indians on TV, I would root for the cavalry, not the Indians. It was that bad. I was that far toward my own destruction.**'
* "As it happened, the fifth anniversary of the My Lai massacre in Vietnam occurred at the time of the 1973 siege of Wounded Knee. **It was difficult to miss the analogy between the 1890 Wounded Knee massacre and My Lai, 1968.** 
* "Alongside the front-page news and photographs of the Wounded Knee siege that was taking place in real time were features with photos of the scene of mutilation and death at My Lai. Lieutenant William 'Rusty' Calley was then serving his twenty-year sentence under house arrest in luxurious officers' quarters at Fort Benning, Georgia, near his hometown. 
* "Yet he remained a national hero who received hundreds of support letters weekly, who was lauded by some as a POW being held by the US military. One of Calley's most ardent defenders was Jimmy Carter, then governor of Georgia. In 1974, President Richard Nixon would pardon Calley. 
* "One of the documented acts, among many, that Calley committed and ordered others to carry out at My Lai took place when he saw a baby crawling from a ditch filled with mutilated, bloody bodies. He picked the baby up by a leg, threw the infant back into the pit, and then shot the baby point-blank. 
* "My Lai was one of thousands of such slaughters led by officers just like Calley, who a few weeks before My Lai had been observed throwing a stooped old man down a well and firing his automatic rifle down the shaft.
* "The ongoing siege at Wounded Knee in 1973 elicited some rare journalistic probing into the 1890 army massacre. In 1970, university librarian Dee Brown had written the book *Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee*, which documented and told the 1890 Wounded Knee story, among many other such nineteenth-century anti-Indian crimes and tragedies. 
* "The book was a surprise best seller, so the name Wounded Knee resonated with a broad public by 1973 . On the front page of one newspaper, editors placed two photographs side by side, each of a pile of bloody, mutilated bodies in a ditch. One was from My Lai in 1968, the other from the Wounded Knee army massacre of the Lakota in 1890. Had they not been captioned, it would have been impossible to tell the difference in time and place.
* "During the first US military invasion of Iraq, a gesture intended to obliterate the 'Vietnam Syndrome,' on February 19, 1991, Brigadier General Richard Neal, briefing reporters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, stated that the US military wanted to ensure a speedy victory once it committed land forces to 'Indian Country.' 
* "The following day, in a little-publicized statement of protest, the National Congress of American Indians pointed out that fifteen thousand Native Americans were serving as combat troops in the Persian Gulf. As we have seen, the term 'Indian Country' is not merely an insensitive racial slur to indicate the enemy, tastelessly employed by accident. 
* "Neither Neal nor any other military authority apologized for the statement, and it continues to be used by the military and the media, usually in its shortened form, 'In Country,' which originated in the Vietnam War. 'Indian Country' and 'In Country' are military terms of trade, like other euphemisms such as 'collateral damage' (killing civilians) and 'ordnance' (bombs) that appear in military training manuals and are used regularly. 
* "'Indian Country' and 'In Country' mean 'behind enemy lines.' **Its current use should serve to remind us of the origins and development of the US military, as well as the nature of our political and social history: annihilation unto unconditional surrender.** 
* "When the redundant 'ground war', more appropriately tagged a 'turkey shoot,' was launched, at the front of the miles of killing machines were armored scouting vehicles of the Second Armored Calvary Regiment (ACR), a self-contained elite unit that won fame during World War II when it headed General Patton's Third Army crossing Europe. 
* "In the Gulf War, the Second ACR played the role of chief scouts for the US Seventh Corps. **A retired ACR commander proudly told a television interviewer that the Second ACR had been formed in the 1830s to fight the Seminoles, and that it had its first great victory when it finally defeated those Indians in the Florida Everglades in 1836.** 
* "The Second ACR in the vanguard of the ground assault on Iraq **thus symbolized the continuity of US war victories and the source of the nation's militarism: the Iraq War was just another Indian war in the US military traditio**n. 
* "After weeks of high-tech bombing in Iraq followed by a caravan of armored tanks shooting everything that moved, the US Special Forces entered Iraqi officers' quarters in Kuwait City. There they found carrier pigeons in cages and notes in Arabic strewn over a desk, which they interpreted to mean that the Iraqi commanders were communicating with their troops, and even with Baghdad, using the carrier pigeons. 
* "High-tech soldiers had been fighting an army that communicated by carrier pigeon--as Shawnees and Muskogees had done two centuries earlier.
* "Twelve years after the Gulf War, a US military force of three hundred thousand invaded Iraq again. A little-read report from Associated Press correspondent Ellen Knickmeyer illustrates the symbolic power of Indian wars as a source of US military memory and practice. 
* "Once again we find the armored scouting vehicles and their troops retracing historical bloody footprints as they perform their 'Seminole Indian war dance':
	> *Capt. Phillip Walford's men leaped into the air and waved empty rifles in an impromptu desert war dance...
	>
	> *With thousands of M1A1 Abrams tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles, Humvees and trucks, the mechanized infantry unit known as the 'Iron Fist' would be the only U.S. armored division in the fight, and would likely meet any Iraqi defenses head on.*
	>
	> *'We will be entering Iraq as an army of liberation, not domination', said Wolford, of Marysville, Ohio, directing the men of his 4th Battalion, 64th Armor Regiment to take down the U.S. flags fluttering from their sand-colored tanks.*
	>
	> ***After a brief prayer, Wolford leaped into an impromptu desert war dance. Camouflaged soldiers joined him, jumping up and down in the sand, chanting and brandishing rifles carefully emptied of their rounds.***

### History Not Past p.195

* "In April 2007, all the news seemed to be coming from Virginia and was about murder--**the murder of Indigenous farmers that commenced four hundred years before with the founding of Jamestown and the rampage at nearby Virginia Tech University on April 16, 2007.** 
* "**Yet no one commented in the media on the juxtaposition of these bookends of colonialism.** Jamestown was famously the first permanent settlement that gave birth to the Commonwealth of Virginia; the colonial epicenter of what became the United States of America nearly two centuries later, the colony out of which was carved the US capital, Washington, on the river whose mouth lay up the coast. 
* "A few years after Jamestown was established, the more familiar and revered colony of Plymouth was planted by English religious dissidents, under the auspices of private investors with royal approval, as with Jamestown, and the same mercenary activities personified by Captain John Smith. 
* "**This was the beginning of British overseas colonialism, after the conquest and colonization of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland turned England into Great Britain.** The Virginia Tech killings were described in 2007 as the worst 'mass killing,' the 'worst massacre,' in US history. 
* "**Descendants of massacred Indigenous ancestors took exception to that designation.** It was curious with the media circus surrounding the Jamestown celebration, and with Queen Elizabeth and President Bush presiding, that journalists failed to compare the colonial massacres of Powhatans four centuries earlier and the single, disturbed individual's shootings of his classmates. **The shooter himself was a child of colonial war, the US war in Korea.**
* "Meditating on the five major US wars since World War II--in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq (1991), Afghanistan, and Iraq (2003)--with flashes of historical memory of Jamestown, the Ohio Valley, and Wounded Knee, brings us to the essence of US history. **A red thread of blood connects the first white settlement in North America with today and the future.** As military historian John Grenier puts it:
	>
	> ***U.S. people are taught that their military culture does not approve of or encourage targeting and killing civilians and know little or nothing about the nearly three centuries of warfare--before and after the founding of the U. S .--that reduced the Indigenous peoples of the continent to a few reservations by burning their towns and fields and killing civilians, driving the refugees out--step by step--across the continent...[V]iolence directed systematically against noncombatants through irregular means, from the start, has been a central part of Americans' way of war.***
	>

-----------------

## Chapter 11: The Doctrine of Discovery p. 197

* "In 1982, the government of Spain and the Holy See (the Vatican, which is a nonvoting state member of the United Nations) proposed to the UN General Assembly that the year 1992 be celebrated in the United Nations as an 'encounter' between Europe and the peoples of the Americas, with Europeans bearing the gifts of civilization and Christianity to the Indigenous peoples. 
* "To the shock of the North Atlantic states that supported Spain's resolution (including the United States and Canada), **the entire African delegation walked out of the meeting and returned with an impassioned statement condemning a proposal to celebrate colonialism in the United Nations, which was established for the purpose of ending colonialism**.
* "**The *Doctrine of Discovery* had reared its head in the wrong place. The resolution was dead, but it was not the end of efforts by Spain, the Vatican, and others in the West to make the Quincentennial a cause for celebration.**
* "Only five years before the debacle in the UN General Assembly, the Indigenous Peoples of the Americas conference at the UN's Geneva headquarters had proposed that 1992 be made the UN 'year of mourning' for the onset of colonialism, African slavery, and genocide against the Indigenous peoples of the Americas, and that October 12 be designated as the UN International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples. 
* "*As the time drew near to the Quincentennial, Spain took the lead in fighting the Indigenous proposals.* **Spain and the Vatican also spent years and huge sums of money preparing for their own celebration of Columbus, enlisting the help of all of the countries of Latin America *except Cuba, which refused--and paid for this in withdrawn Spanish financial investments*.** 
* "In the United States, the George H. W. Bush administration cooperated with the project and produced its own series of events. In the end, compromise won at the United Nations: Indigenous peoples garnered a Decade for the World's Indigenous Peoples, which officially began in 1994 but was inaugurated at UN headquarters in New York in December 1992. 
* "August 9, not October 12, was designated as the annual UN International Day for the World's Indigenous Peoples, and the Nobel Peace Prize went to Guatemalan Mayan leader Rigoberta Menchu, announced in Oslo on October 12, 1992, a decision that infuriated the Spanish government and the Vatican. 
* **"The organized celebrations of Columbus flopped, thanks to multiple, highly visible protests by Indigenous peoples and their allies.** Particularly, support grew for the work of Indigenous peoples at the United Nations to develop new international law standards.
* "**According to the centuries-old 'Doctrine of Discovery', European nations acquired title to the lands they 'discovered,' and Indigenous inhabitants lost their natural right to that land after Europeans had arrived and claimed it.** 
* "**Under this legal cover for theft, Euro-American wars of conquest and settler colonialism devastated Indigenous nations and communities, ripping their territories away from them and transforming the land into private property, real estate.**
* "**Most of that land ended up in the hands of land speculators and agribusiness operators, many of which, up to the mid-nineteenth century, were plantations worked by another form of private property, enslaved Africans. Arcane as it may seem, the doctrine remains the basis for federal laws still in effect that control Indigenous peoples' lives and destinies, even their histories by distorting them.**

### The Whip of Colonialism p.199

* "From the mid-fifteenth century to the mid-twentieth century, most of the non-European world was colonized under the Doctrine of Discovery, one of the first principles of international law Christian European monarchies promulgated to legitimize investigating, mapping, and claiming lands belonging to peoples outside Europe. 
* "It originated in a papal bull issued in 1455 that permitted the Portuguese monarchy to seize West Africa. Following Columbus's infamous exploratory voyage in 1492, sponsored by the king and queen of the infant Spanish state, another papal bull extended similar permission to Spain. 
* "Disputes between the Portuguese and Spanish monarchies led to the papal-initiated Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), which, besides dividing the globe equally between the two Iberian empires, **clarified that only non-Christian lands fell under the discovery doctrine.** 
* "**This doctrine on which all European states relied thus originated with the *arbitrary* and unilateral establishment of the Iberian monarchies' exclusive rights under Christian canon law to colonize foreign peoples, and this right was later seized by other European monarchical colonizing projects.** 
* "The French Republic used this legalistic instrument for its nineteenth- and twentieth­ century settler colonialist projects, as did the newly independent United States when it continued the colonization of North America begun by the British. In 1792, not long after the US founding, **Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson claimed that the Doctrine of Discovery developed by European states was international law applicable to the new US government as well**. 
* "In 1823 the US Supreme Court issued its decision in Johnson v. Mcintosh. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice John Marshall held that the Doctrine of Discovery had been an established principle of European law and of English law in effect in Britain's North American colonies and was also the law of the United States. 
* "The Court defined the exclusive property rights that a European country acquired by dint of discovery: 'Discovery gave title to the government, by whose subjects, or by whose authority, it was made, against all other European governments, which title might be consummated by possession.' **Therefore, European and Euro-American 'discoverers' had gained real-property rights in the lands of Indigenous peoples by merely planting a flag.** Indigenous rights were--in the Court's words--'in no instance, entirely disregarded; but were necessarily, to a considerable extent, impaired.'** 
* "The Court further held that **Indigenous 'rights to complete sovereignty, as independent nations, were necessarily diminished.' Indigenous people could continue to live on the land, but title resided with the discovering power, the United States. A later decision concluded that Native nations were 'domestic, dependent nations.'**

* "**The Doctrine of Discovery is so taken for granted that it is rarely mentioned in historical or legal texts published in the Americas.** The UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Peoples, which meets annually for two weeks, devoted its entire 2012 session to the doctrine. Three decades earlier, as Indigenous peoples of the Americas began asserting their presence in the UN human rights system, they had proposed such a conference and study. 
* "The World Council of Churches, the Unitarian Universalist Church, the Episcopal Church, and other Protestant religious institutions, responding to demands from Indigenous peoples, **have made statements disassociating themselves from the Doctrine of Discovery**. 
* "The New York Society of Friends (Quakers), in denying the legitimacy of the doctrine, asserted in 2012 that it clearly 'still has the force of law today' and is not simply a medieval relic. The Quakers pointed out that the United States rationalizes its claims to sovereignty over Native nations, for instance in the 2005 US Supreme Court case, *City of Sherrill v. Oneida Nation of Indians*. 
* "The statement asserts: **'We cannot accept that the Doctrine of Discovery was ever a true authority for the forced takings of lands and the enslavement or extermination of peoples.'** The Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) resolution regarding this is particularly powerful and an excellent model. **The UUA 'repudiate(s) the Doctrine of Discovery as a relic of colonialism, feudalism, and religious, cultural, and racial biases having no place in the modern day treatment of indigenous peoples.'**
* "The Unitarians resolved to 'expose the historical reality and impact of the Doctrine of Discovery and eliminate its presence in the contemporary policies, programs, theologies, and structures of Unitarian Universalism; and...invite indigenous partners to a process of Honor and Healing (often called Truth and Reconciliation).' 
* "They additionally encouraged 'other religious bodies to reject the use of the Doctrine of Discovery to dominate indigenous peoples' and resolved to collaborate with groups 'to propose a specific Congressional Resolution to repudiate this doctrine...and **call upon the United States to fully implement the standards of the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in the U.S. law and policy without qualifications**.'

### Tangled Contradictions p.201

* "US officials get tangled in **the contradictions inherent in the attempt to legitimize empire building through the Doctrine of Discovery and the origin story of making a clear break from the British empire**. The rhetoric is often baffling, particularly when it references US American cultural memory of the wars against Native nations, as it did following the declaration of the 'War on Terror' after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
* "In early 2011, a Yemeni citizen, Ali Hamza al Bahlul, was serving a life sentence at Guantanamo as an 'enemy combatant', a military tribunal having convicted him of crimes associated with his service to al-Qaeda as Osama bin Laden's media secretary. 
* "The Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) issued a statement prior to the hearing in the appeal of Bahlul's conviction. In arguing that Bahlul's conviction be upheld, a Pentagon lawyer, navy captain Edward S. White, relied on a precedent from an 1818 tribunal. 
* "In his thirty-seven-page military commissions brief, Captain White wrote: 'Not only was the Seminole belligerency unlawful, but, much like modern-day al Qaeda, the very way in which the Seminoles waged war against U.S. targets itself violate the customs and usages of war.' 
* "The CCR objected to this passage in the government's brief. 'The court should...reject the government's notable reliance on the *Seminole Wars* of the 1800s, a genocide that led to the Trail of Tears,' the CCR declared. 'The government's characterization of Native American resistance to the United States as *much like modern-day al Qaeda* is not only factually wrong but overtly racist, and cannot present any legitimate legal basis to uphold Mr. Bahlul's conviction.' In response, the Pentagon's general counsel issued a letter stating that the US government stood by its precedent.

### 'We Wish to Continue to Exist' p.202

* "The question of self-determination of peoples is a recent historical phenomenon integral both to the formation of modern European nation-states and to the gradual formation of an imperialist world system eventually led by the United States. 
* "National integration and state formation occurred first in western Europe as its states established colonies and colonial regimes in Africa, Asia, the Pacific, the Americas, and the Caribbean, and as the United States established itself as an independent state. 
* "These conquests afforded European states and the United States access to vast resources and labor that in turn allowed them to industrialize and to create efficient bureaucratic structures and political republicanism. 
* "At the end of this process, with decolonization of European holdings in the twentieth century, self-determination became a major global issue eventually incorporating all human beings as citizens of nation-states. 
* "The creation of nation-states and the redrawing of national boundaries that this often entailed inevitably raised the questions of which national, ethnic, religious, and linguistic communities were included and whether their consent or participation would be required.
* "There are peoples and nations without their own states, locked under a state authority that may or may not be willing to respond to their demands for autonomy within the existing state. If the state is not willing, the peoples or nations may choose to insist on independence. That is the work of self-determination.
* "In the United States, Indigenous nations that seek political autonomy or even independence engage in nation building--that is, developing Indigenous governance and an economic base. For decades, Native activists and organizers in North America have worked tirelessly to establish the validity of treaties and to foster and protect the self-determination and sovereignty of Indigenous nations. 
* "The nations seek control of their social and political institutions without compromising what they consider unique and essential cultural values. The central concern for Indigenous peoples in the United States is prevailing upon the federal government to honor hundreds of treaties and other agreements concluded between the United States and Indigenous nations as between two sovereign states. 
* "Demands to have treaties and agreements upheld have never abated, and they have accelerated since the end of the termination era. **However, the Indigenous concept of nation and sovereignty is quite distinct from the Western model of the state as the final arbiter of decision making, based on police enforcement.** Rather, as Indigenous lawyer and activist Sharon Venne has put it, 'We know the laws given to us by the Creator. It is an obligation. It is a duty. It is the future of our [children's] children. **We cannot be like the non-indigenous people who make rules and regulations and change them when they don't like the rule or regulation. We were given the laws by the Creator. We have to live the laws. This is sovereignty of Indigenous Peoples.**'
* "Following the 1973 standoff at Wounded Knee, the American Indian Movement brought together more than five thousand Indigenous representatives, including ones from Latin America and the Pacific, in a ten-day gathering that **founded the International Indian Treaty Council (IITC)**, which then applied for and received UN nongovernmental consultative status in 1975. 
* "The HTC proceeded to organize the first conference to be held at the United Nations on Indigenous Peoples of the Americas in 1977· At this conference, Northern Cheyenne tribal judge Marie Sanchez opened the proceedings:
	> *Members of this conference, delegates, and my brothers and sisters who are present here today.*
	>
	> *We are the target for the total final extermination of us as people.*
	>
	> *The question I would like to bring forth to this conference, to the delegates from other countries here present, is why have you not recognized us as sovereign people before? Why did we have to travel this distance to come to you? Had you not thought that the United States Government in its deliberate and systematic attempt to suppress us, had you not thought that that was the reason they did not want to recognize us as sovereign people? The only positive thing that I feel should come out of this conference, if you are going to include us as part of the international family is for you to recognize us, for you to give us this recognition. Only with that can we continue to live as completely sovereign people.*
	>
	> *And you also, because you are part of the family of this world, you should also be very concerned, because the common enemy is your enemy too, and that enemy dictates policy to your governments also. I warn you not to be so dependent on the country that we are under, on the government that we are under. We have demonstrated to you how many hundreds of years we have survived.*
	>
	> *We wish to continue to exist.*
* "This international work at the United Nations grew slowly at first, but by the mid-1980s it was attracting grassroots Indigenous representatives from around the world and constructing important initiatives.
* "The global Indigenous cause reached a **major milestone in 2007 when the UN General Assembly passed the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples**. 
* "Only **four members of the assembly voted in opposition**--all of them Anglo settler-states-the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia. All four--with some embarrassment--later changed their votes to approval. Leo Killsback reflects the perceptions of most Native people that the declaration might 'bring western cultures out of their old world of savagery and closer to humanity,' noting the example of the end of World War II:
	> *After the fall of Nazi Germany, its leaders were publicly ostracized, tried, convicted, and executed for war crimes at the Nuremburg trials. This led to the Genocide Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Nazi society members affirmed that the Holocaust occurred and some were forced to visit concentration camps only feet from their place of residence. Under truth and reconciliation German society began to rebuild itself, and with the end of their savage world, they and numerous other countries adopted Holocaust-denial laws. This is exactly how a society moved from one reality to a nother.*
* "For Indigenous peoples in North America an important action within the UN human rights framework was the 1987 mandate given to a UN special rapporteur--Miguel Alfonso Martinez--to investigate the status of treaties and agreements between Indigenous nations and the original colonial powers and the national governments that now claim authority over Indigenous nations by virtue of those treaties. 
* "The UN Study on Treaties--completed in 1999--is a useful tool for Indigenous peoples in the United States in their continuing struggles for land restoration and sovereignty. **The investigation concluded that Indigenous treaty rights in the United States have contemporary effective status.** 
* "**The special rapporteur based this finding largely on the US Constitution**, which in Article VI provides that 'all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary not­ withstanding.' Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution explicitly includes relations with Indigenous nations as among the powers of Congress: 'To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.'

### Land Claims p.205

* "With a large part of Indigenous nations' territories and resources in what is now the United States taken through aggressive war, outright theft, and legislative appropriations, Native peoples have vast claims to reparations and restitution. 
* "Indigenous nations negotiated numerous treaties with the United States that included land transfers and monetary compensation, but **the remaining Indigenous territories have steadily shrunk due to direct federal appropriation by various means** as well as through **government failure to meet its obligation to protect Indigenous landholdings as required under treaties**. 
* The US government has acknowledged some of these claims and has offered monetary compensation. However, since the upsurge of Indian rights movements in the 1960s, Indigenous nations have demanded restoration of treaty-guaranteed land rather than monetary compensation.
* "**Native Americans--including those who are legal scholars--ordinarily do not use the term *reparations* in reference to their land claims and treaty rights. Rather, they demand restoration, restitution, or repatriation of lands acquired by the United States outside valid treaties.** 
* "These demands for return of lands and water and other resource rights illegally taken certainly could be termed 'reparations,' but they have no parallel in the monetary reparations owed, for example, to Japanese Americans for forced incarceration or to descendants of enslaved African-Americans. **No monetary amount can compensate for lands illegally seized, particularly those sacred lands necessary for Indigenous peoples to regain social coherence.** 
* "One form of Native claim does seek monetary compensation and might provide a template for other classes. Of the hundreds of lawsuits for federal trust mismanagement that Indigenous groups have filed--most since the 1960s--the largest and best known is the *Cobell v. Salazar* class-action suit, initially filed in 1996 and settled in 2011. 
* "The individual Indigenous litigants, from many Native nations, claimed that the US Department of the Interior, as trustee of Indigenous assets, had lost, squandered, stolen, and otherwise wasted hundreds of millions of dollars dating back to the forced land allotment beginning in the late 1880s. 
* "By the end of 2009, it was clear that the case was headed for a decision favoring the Indigenous groups when the lead plaintiffs, representing nearly a half-million Indigenous individuals, accepted a $3.4-billion settlement proposed by the Obama administration. The amount of the settlement was greater than the half-billion dollars that the court would likely have awarded. **However, what was sacrificed in the settlement was a detailed accounting of the federal government's misfeasance.**
* "As one reporter lamented: 'The result will see some involved with the case, especially lawyers, become quite rich, while many Indians--the majority, in all likelihood--will receive about a third of what it takes to feed a family of four for just one year.'
* "Another important form of reparations is the repatriation of remains of dead ancestors and burial items. After considerable struggle on the part of Indigenous religious practitioners, Congress enacted the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 (NAGPRA), which requires that museums return human remains and burial items to the appropriate Indigenous communities. 
* "It is fitting that Congress used the term 'repatriation' in the act. Before NAGPRA, the federal government had used 'repatriation' to describe the return of remains of prisoners of war to foreign nations. **Native American nations are sovereign as well, and Congress correctly characterized the returns as repatriations.**
* "**Although compensation for federal trust mismanagement and repatriation of ancestral remains represent important victories, *land claims and treaty rights are most central to Indigenous peoples' fight for reparations in the United States.*** 
* "**The case of the great Sioux Nation exemplifies the persistence among Indigenous nations and communities to protect their sovereignty and cultures.** The Sioux have never accepted the validity of the US confiscation of **Paha Sapa--the Black Hills**. 
* "Mount Rushmore is controversial among Native Americans because it is located in the Black Hills. Members of the American Indian Movement led occupations of the monument beginning in 1971. Return of the Black Hills was the major Sioux demand in the 1973 occupation of Wounded Knee. 
* "Due to a decade of intense protests and occupations by the Sioux--on July 23, 1980i--in *United States v. Sioux Nation of Indians*, the US Supreme Court ruled that the Black Hills had been taken illegally and that remuneration equal to the initial offering price plus interest--nearly $106 million--be paid. 
* "The Sioux refused the award and continued to demand return of the Black Hills. The money remained in an interest-bearing account--which by 2010--amounted to more than $757 million. **The Sioux believe that accepting the money would validate the US theft of their most sacred land.** 
* "The Sioux Nation's determination to repatriate the Black Hills attracted renewed media attention in 2011. A segment of the *PBS NewsHour* titled "For Great Sioux Nation, Black Hills Can't Be Bought for $1.3 Billion" aired on August 24. **The reporter described a Sioux reservation as one of the most difficult places in which to live in the United States:**
	> ***Few people in the Western Hemisphere have shorter life expectancies. Males--on average--live to just 48 years old, females to 52. Almost half of all people above the age of 40 have diabetes.***
	>
	> *And the economic realities are even worse. **Unemployment rates are consistently above 80 percent. In Shannon County, inside the Pine Ridge Reservation, half the children live in poverty, and the average income is $8,000 a year**.*
	>
	> *But there are funds available, a federal pot now worth more than a billion dollars. That sits here in the U.S. Treasury Department waiting to be collected by nine Sioux tribes. The money stems from a 1980 Supreme Court ruling that set aside $105 million to compensate the Sioux for the taking of the Black Hills in 1877, an isolated mountain range rich in minerals that stretched from South Dakota to Wyoming. **The only problem: The Sioux never wanted the money because the land was never for sale**.*

* "**That one of the most impoverished communities in the Americas would refuse a billion dollars demonstrates the relevance and significance of the land to the Siouxi--*not as an economic resource but as a relationship between people and place*--a profound feature of the resilience of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas.**

### Economic Self-Determination p.208

* "The relationship of economic development and Indigenous peoples in the United States is not a twentieth-century phenomenon. **The collusion of business and government in the theft and exploitation of Indigenous lands and resources is the core element of colonization and forms the basis of US wealth and power.** 
* "By the end of the nineteenth century, Indigenous communities had little control over their resources or their economic situations, receiving only royalties for mining and leasing, funds held in trust in Washington. During the Johnson administration's War on Poverty, most reservation economic development was spurred by funding and grants from the Economic Development Administration, the Office of Economic Opportunity, and other government agencies. 
* "The Bureau of Indian Affairs began a program to woo industrial plants to reservations, promising cheap labor and infrastructure investment. **The largest such experiment was that of the giant electronics company Fairchild's assembly plant in the Navajo Nation.**
* "Established at the town of Shiprock--in the northeastern part of the reservation, in New Mexico--in 1969, the plant became the single largest industrial employer in New Mexico by 1975.
* "**Twelve hundred Navajos made up the initial workforce. By 1974, the numbers had lessened to a thousand, but still Navajos were 95 percent of the workforce.** Then, during 1974-75, the Navajo workforce shrunk to six hundred. 
* "Fairchild's Mountain View, California, headquarters claimed that Navajos were quitting, something very common in the electronics assembly industry. Non-Indians were being hired to replace Navajos. **What actually had been happening were layoffs, not resignations.** 
* "**The federal government subsidized the wages for the six-month training period on the job, for which little training is required, and Fairchild was laying off those workers whom they would have to pay and hiring new trainees at no cost.** 
* "Local Navajo activists and former Fairchild employees, along with help from American Indian Movement leaders, organized a protest at the plant, which led to the workers occupying it. **Fairchild decommissioned the plant and moved it overseas.** 
* "Documents recovered by protesters revealed that Fairchild was seeking a pretext to break its lease. The Navajo Nation had built the plant to Fairchild's specifications at a cost of three and a half million dollars.
* "The Indian Self-Determination Act of 1975 validated Indigenous control over their own social and economic development with continuation of federal financial obligations under treaties and agreements. Acting upon the new mandate, a number of Indigenous nations with mineral resources formed the Council of Energy Resource Tribes (CERT). Patterned after the federation of oil-producing states, OPEC--Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries--**CERT sought to renegotiate mineral leases that the BIA had practically given away to energy companies**. 
* "Native lands west of the Mississippi held considerable resources: 30 percent of the low-sulfur coal in the United States, 5 percent of the oil, 10 percent of the natural gas, and 80 percent of the uranium. **CERT was able to establish a center of information and action in Denver to serve its members with technical and legal assistance.** 
* "**The Jicarilla Apache Nation slapped a severance tax on the oil and gas taken from their lands.** A corporate legal challenge to this wound up in the Supreme Court, which found that Native nations had the right to tax corporations that operated in their boundaries.


---------


* "Navajo chairman Peter MacDonald was the force behind the founding of CERT and was its first director. But he quickly found his scheme of mining as the basis for economic development chal­ lenged by young Navajos who perceived the downside of ecological destruction. Strip-mining of coal and uranium in the Navajo Na­ tion was bad enough, but then a coal-gasification plant was estab­ lished to feed into the Navajo electricity-generating plant that sent power to Phoenix and Los Angeles but provided Navajos with little or none. Navajo activist John Redhouse, who became director of the National Indian Youth Council, led decades of struggle against unrestricted mining, with new generations continuing the fight.
* "Like many de-industrializing US cities and states in the 1980s, some Native nations turned to gaming for revenue. In 1986, they formed the National Indian Gaming Association for the purpose of lobbying state and federal governments and to represent the interests of its members. But in 1988 Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, which gave the states some control over gaming, a dangerous surrender of sovereignty for those Native nations operat­ ing casinos. Indigenous gaming operations now constitute a $26 bil­ lion industry annually that employs three hundred thousand people, with about half the 564 federally recognized nations operating ca­ sinos of various sizes. Profits have been used in myriad ways, some for per capita payments, others earmarked for educational and lin­ guistic development, housing, hospitals, and even investing in larger projects such as the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of the American Indian. A good portion of profits go to lobbying politi­ cians of state and federal governments. The Indian gaming lobby in California, for instance, is second only to the prison guards union in the state.

### The Narrative of Dysfunction p.211

* "The mainstream media and books regularly expose and denounce the poverty and social dysfunction found in Indigenous communi­ ties. Rates of alcoholism and suicide are far higher than national av­ erages, and higher even than in other communities living in poverty. In a book of case studies of poverty and neglected sites of deteriora­ tion in the United States, journalist Chris Hedges offered an impas­ sioned account of the Pine Ridge Reservation.
* "As well-meaning and accurate as such portrayals are, however, they miss the specific circumstances that reproduce Indigenous pov­ erty and social scarring-namely, the colonial condition. As Vine Deloria Jr. and other Native American activists and scholars have emphasized, there is a direct link between the suppression of Indige­ nous sovereignty and the powerlessness manifest in depressed social conditions. Deloria Jr. explained that for the Sioux, everyone has responsibility and rituals to perform that involve a particular ge­ ography. In their case, this means sites in the Black Hills: "Some of the holy men up there will say that a lot of the social problems with the Sioux are the result of losing the Black Hills, so you couldn't perform your duties and become a contributor to the ongoing cre­ ation. And consequently, people began to fall away and they started to suffer and they started to fight among themselves."21 In continu­ ing to disregard treaty rights and deny restitution of sacred lands such as the Black Hills, the federal government prevents Indigenous communities from performing their most elemental responsibilities as inscribed in their cultural and religious teachings. In other words, sovereignty equates to survival-nationhood instead of genocide. Ethnographer Nancy Oestreich Lurie provocatively described Indian drinking as "the world's oldest on-going protest demon­ stration."22 The effects of continued colonization form similar pat­ terns among Indigenous communities throughout the Americas, as well as among the Maori of New Zealand and the Australian Aborigines.
* "The experience of generations of Native Americans in on- and off-reservation boarding schools, run by the federal government or Christian missions, contributed significantly to the family and social dysfunction still found in Native communities. Generations of child abuse, including sexual abuse-from the founding of the first schools by missionaries in the 1830s and the federal government in 1875 until most were closed and the remaining ones reformed in the l97os-traumatized survivors and their progeny.24 In 2002, a coalition of Indigenous groups started the Boarding School Healing Project, which documented through research and oral history the extensive abuses that go beyond individual casualties to disruption of Indigenous life at every level. Sun Elk was the first child from the very traditional Taos Pueblo to attend the Carlisle Indian Industrial School, spending seven years there beginning in 1 8 8 3 . After a harsh reentry into Taos society, he told his story:
	> *They told us that Indian ways were bad. They said we must get civilized. I remember that word too. It means "be like the white man." I am willing to be like the white man, but I did not believe Indians' ways were wrong. But they kept teach­ ing us for seven years. And the books told how bad the In­ dians had been to the white men-burning their towns and killing their women and children. But I had seen white men do that to Indians. We all wore white man's clothes and ate white man's food and went to white man's churches and spoke white man's talk. And so after a while we also be­ gan to say Indians were bad. We laughed at our own people and their blankets and cooking pots and sacred societies and dances.*
* "
Corporal punishment was unknown in Indigenous families but was routine in the boarding schools. Often punishment was inflicted for being "too Indian"-the darker the child, the more often and severe the beatings. The children were made to feel that it was crimi­ nal to be Indian.26 A woman whose mother experienced boarding school related the results:
	> *Probably my mother and...er brothers and sisters were the first in our family to go to boarding school...And the stories she told...were horrendous. There were beatings. There [was] a very young classmate-I don't know how old they were, probably preschool or grade school-who lost a hand in having to clean this machine that baked bread or cut dough or something, and having to kneel for hours on cold basement floors as punishment...My mother lived with a rage all her life, and I think the fact that they were taken away so young was part of this rage and how it-the fallout-was on us as a family.
* "Ponca historian Roger Buffalohead verifies that testimony:
	> *The idea of corporal punishment, so foreign to traditional In­ dian cultures, became a way of life for those students return­ ing from their educational experience.*
	> *Yet you find by the thirties and forties in most Native communities, where large numbers of young people had, in the previous years, attended boarding schools, an increasing number of parents who utilized corporal punishment in the raising of their children, so that although you can't prove a direct connection, I think you can certainly see that boarding school experiences, where corporal punishment was the name of the game, had [their] impact on the next generations of na­ tive people.*
* "Sexual abuse of both girls and boys was also rampant. One woman remembers:
* "At one mission school, a priest was known for his sexual advances:
* "Much documentation and testimony attest to the never-ending resistance by children in boarding schools. Running away was the most common way to resist, but there were also acts of nonparticipa­ tion and sabotage, secretly speaking their languages and practicing ceremonies. This surely accounts for their survival, but the damage is nearly incomprehensible. Mohawk historian Taiaiake Alfred asks:
	> *What is the legacy of colonialism? Dispossession, disempowerment, and disease inflicted by the white man, to be sure...**Yet the enemy is in plain view: residential schools, racism, expropriation, extinguishment, warship, welfare**.*
* "Indigenous women, in particular, have continued to bear the brunt of sexual violence, both within families and by settler preda­ tors. Incidence of rape on reservations has long been astronomical. The colonialist restrictions on Indigenous policing authority on reservations-yet another legacy of the Doctrine of Discovery and the impairment of Indigenous sovereignty-opened the door to perpetrators of sexual violence who knew there would be no con­ sequences for their actions.32 Under the US colonial system, jurisdic­ tion for crimes committed on Native lands falls to federal and state authorities because Native justice can be applied only to reserva­ tion residents, and then only for misdemeanors. One in three Native American women has been raped or experienced attempted rape, and the rate of sexual assault on Native American women is more than twice the national average. For five years after publication of a scathing 2007 report by Amnesty International, Native American and women's organizations, including the National Organization for Women (NOW), lobbied Congress to add a new section to the
1994 Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) addressing the special situation of Native American women living on reservations.33 The added provision would allow Native nations' courts jurisdiction to arrest and prosecute non-Native men who enter reservations and commit rape. At the end of 2012, the Republican-dominated US Congress denied reauthorization of the VAWA, because it included the provision. In March 2013, however, that opposition was over­ come, and President Barack Obama signed the amended act back into law-a small step forward for Native sovereignty.

### Indigenous Governance p.215

* "For generations, Native nations, occasionally with the help of federal or state government, treated the symptoms of colonialism. But with the powerful Indigenous self-determination movements of the second half of the twentieth century, those nations participated in drafting and instituting new international law that supports their aspirations, and they began working on shoring up their sovereignty through governance. 
* "Through this work, US Indigenous peoples have reconceptualized their current forms of government based on new constitutions that reflect their specific cultures. Navajo thinking on a future constitution expresses that desire. Like some other Native nations, the Navajo, the most populous and the one holding the largest land base in the United States, has never had a constitution. But others do have constitutions similar to that of the United States. Nearly sixty Native nations adopted constitutions before 1934. 
* "Following the Indian Reorganization Act of that year, another 130 nations wrote constitutions according to federal guidelines but without significant participation of their citizenry. The movement to create, revise, or rewrite constitutions has seen notable success in two instances during the first decade of the twenty-first century.
* "From 2004 to 2006, the Osage Nation, located in northeastern Oklahoma, engaged in a contentious process of reform that produced a new constitution. The preamble reflects the extraordinary context and content of the new law:
	> *We the Wah-zha-zhe, known as the Osage People, having formed as Clans in the far distant past, have been a People and as a People have walked this earth and enjoyed the blessing of Wah-kon-tah for more centuries than we truly know.*
	>
	> *Having resolved to live in harmony, we now come together so that we may once more unite as a Nation and as a Peo­ ple, calling upon the fundamental values that we hold sacred: Justice, Fairness, Compassion, Respect for and Protection of Child, Elder, All Fellow Beings, and Self.*
	>
	> *Paying homage to generations of Osage leaders of the past and present, we give thanks for their wisdom and courage. Acknowledging our ancient tribal order as the foundation of our present government, first reformed in the 1881 Constitution of the Osage Nation, we continue our legacy by again reorganizing our government.*
	> 
	> *This Constitution, created by the Osage People, hereby grants to every Osage citizen a vote that is equal to all others and form a government that is accountable to the citizens of the Osage Nation.*
	> *We, the Osage People, based on centuries of being a People, now strengthen our government in order to preserve and perpetuate a full and abundant Osage way of life that benefits all Osages, living and as yet unborn.*
* "Similarly--in 2009--the White Earth Nation of the Anishinaabeg (Ojibwe people) adopted a new constitution. White Earth is located in central Minnesota and is one of a number of Anishinaabe reservations in Minnesota, with others in Wisconsin, South Dakota, and Canada. The preamble to the White Earth constitution is revealing:
