---
title: Part 2 - An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States
permalink: /dunbar-ortiz-2014-2/
sitemap: false
---

# [An Indigenous Peoples' History of the United States | Part 2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Indigenous_Peoples%27_History_of_the_United_States)
* Author: [Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roxanne_Dunbar-Ortiz)
* Publication Date: 2014

-------

## Table of Contents
* [**Introduction**: This Land p. 1](/dunbar-ortiz-2014-1)
* **Chapter 1**: Follow the Corn p. 15
* **Chapter 2**: Culture of Conquest p. 32
* **Chapter 3**: Cult of the Covenant p. 45
* **Chapter 4**: Bloody Footprints p. 56
* **Chapter 5**: The Birth of a Nation p. 78
* **Chapter 6**: The Last of the Mohicans and Andrew Jackson's White Republic p. 95
* **Chapter 7**: Sea to Shining Sea p. 117
* **Chapter 8**: "Indian Country" p. 133
* [**Chapter 9**:  US Triumphalism and Peacetime Colonialism p. 162](/dunbar-ortiz-2014-3)
* **Chapter 10**:  Ghost Dance Prophecy: A Nation is Coming p. 178
* **Chapter 11**:  The Doctrine of Discovery p. 197
* **Conclusion**: The Future of the United States p. 218

-------

## Chapter 5: The Birth of a Nation p. 78
* "The British withdrew from the fight to maintain their thirteen colonies in 1783, in order to redirect their resources to the conquest of South Asia. The British East India Company had been operating in the subcontinent since 1600 in a project parallel to Britain's colonization of the North American Atlantic Coast. Britain's transfer to the United States of its claim to the Ohio Country spelled a nightmarish disaster for all Indigenous peoples east of the Mississippi. 
* "Britain's withdrawal in 1783 did not end military actions against Indigenous peoples but rather was a prelude to unrestrained violent colonization of the continent. In negotiations to end the war, Britain did not insist on consideration for the Indigenous nations that resisted the settlers' war of secession. 
* "In the resulting 1783 Treaty of Paris, the Crown transferred to the United States ownership of all its territory south of the Great Lakes, from the Mississippi to the Atlantic, and north of Spanish-occupied Florida. Muskogee Creek leader Alexander McGillivray expressed the general Indigenous view: 'To find ourselves and country betrayed to our enemies and divided between the Spaniards and Americans is cruel and ungenerous.'

### The New Order p.79

* "Wars continued for another century--unrelentingly and without pause--and the march across the continent used the same strategy and tactics of scorched earth and annihilation with increasingly deadly firepower. Somehow, even 'genocide' seems an inadequate description for what happened, yet rather than viewing it with horror, most Americans have conceived of it as their country's manifest destiny.
* "With the consolidation of the new state--the United States of America--by 1790, **the opportunity for Indigenous nations to negotiate alliances with competing European empires against the despised settlers who intended to destroy them was greatly narrowed**. 
* "Nevertheless, Indigenous nations had defied the founding of the independent United States in a manner that allowed for their survival and created a legacy--a culture of resistance--that has persisted. By the time of the birth of the US republic, Indigenous peoples in what is now the continental United States had been resisting European colonization for two centuries. They had no choice given the aspirations of the colonizers: total elimination of Native nations or survival. 
* "Precolonial Indigenous societies were dynamic social systems with adaptation built into them. Fighting for survival did not require cultural abandonment. On the contrary, the cultures used already existing strengths, such as diplomacy and mobility, to develop new mechanisms required to live in nearly constant crisis. 
* "There is always a hard core of resistance in that process, but the culture of resistance also includes accommodations to the colonizing social order, including absorbing Christianity into already existing religious practices, using the colonizer's language, and intermarrying with settlers and, more importantly, with other oppressed groups, such as escaped African slaves. Without the culture of resistance, surviving Indigenous peoples under US colonization would have been eliminated through individual assimilation.
* "A new element was added in the independent Anglo-American legal regime: treaty making. The US Constitution specifically refers to Indigenous nations only once, but significantly, in Article I, Section 8: '[Congress shall have Power] to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes'. In the federal system in which all powers not specifically reserved for the federal government go to the states, relations with Indigenous nations are unequivocally a federal matter.
* "**Although not mentioned as such, Native peoples are implied in the Second Amendment.** Male settlers had been required in the colonies to serve in militias during their lifetimes for the purpose of raiding and razing Indigenous communities, the southern colonies included, and later states' militias were used as 'slave patrols'. 
* "The Second Amendment--ratified in 1791--enshrined these irregular forces into law: 'A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed'. The continuing significance of that 'freedom' specified in the Bill of Rights reveals the settler-colonialist cultural roots of the United States that appear even in the present as a sacred right.
* "US genocidal wars against Indigenous nations continued unabated in the 1790s and were woven into the very fabric of the new nation-state. **The fears, aspirations, and greed of Anglo-American settlers on the borders of Indigenous territories perpetuated this warfare and influenced the formation of the US Army, much as the demands and actions of backcountry settlers had shaped the colonial militias in North America.** 
* "Owners of large, slave-worked plantations sought to expand their landholdings while small farm owners who were unable to compete with the planters and were pushed off their land now desperately sought cheap land to support their families. The interests of both settler groups were in tension with those of state and military authorities who sought to build a new professional military based on Washington's army. 
* "Just as the US government and its army were taking form, a number of settlements on the peripheries of Indigenous nations threatened to secede, prompting the army to make rapid expansion into Indigenous territories a top priority. Brutal counterinsurgency warfare would be the key to the army's destruction of the Indigenous peoples' civilization in the Ohio Country and the rest of what was then called the Northwest over the first quarter-century of US independence."

### Total War in Ohio Sets the Stage p.81

* "The first Washington administration was consumed by the crisis engendered by its inability to quickly conquer and colonize the Ohio Country over which it claimed sovereignty. During the Confederation period--before the US Constitution was written and ratified--the Indigenous nations in that region had access to a constant supply of British arms and had formed effective political and military alliances, the first of them forged by Mohawk leader Joseph Brant during the 1780s. 
* "Washington's administration determined that only war--not diplomacy--would break up the Indigenous alliances. Secretary of War Henry Knox told the army commander of Fort Washington (where Cincinnati is today) that 'to extend a defensive and efficient protection to so extensive a frontier, against solitary, or small parties of enterprising savages, seems altogether impossible. No other remedy remains, but to extirpate, utterly, if possible, the said *Banditti*'. 
* "These orders could not be implemented with a conventional army engaged in regular warfare. Although federal officers commanded the army, the fighters were nearly all drawn from militias made up primarily of squatter settlers from Kentucky. They were unaccustomed to army discipline but fearless and willing to kill to get a piece of land to grab or some scalps for bounty.
* "The army found the Miami villages they planned to attack already deserted, so they set up a base in one of the villages and waited for a Miami assault. But the assault was not forthcoming. When the commander sent out small units to find the Miamis, these search-and-destroy missions were ambushed and sent fleeing by allied Miamis and Shawnees under the leadership of Little Turtle (Meshekinnoqquah) and Blue Jacket (Weyapiersenwah). 
* "The deserted towns had been bait to lure the invaders into ambushes. The commander reported to the War Department that his forces had burned three hundred buildings and destroyed twenty thousand bushels of corn. Those were likely facts, but his claim to have broken up the Indigenous political and military organization was not accurate. Knox apparently knew that more than food and property destruction would be needed to quell resistance. He ordered the commanders to recruit five hundred weathered Kentucky mounted rangers to burn and loot Miami towns and fields along the Wabash River. **They were to capture women and children as hostages to use as terms of surrender.** 
* "In carrying out these orders, **the marauding rangers demonstrated what they could accomplish with unmitigated violence and a total lack of scruples and respect for noncombatants**. They destroyed the Miamis' two largest towns and took forty-one women and children captive, then sent warnings to the other towns that the same would be their lot unless they surrendered unconditionally: 
	> *Your warriors will be slaughtered, your towns and villages ransacked and destroyed, your wives and children carried into captivity, and you may be assured that those who escape the fury of our mighty chiefs shall find no resting place on this side of the Great Lakes.*
* "Yet the Indians of the Ohio Country continued to fight, well aware of the likely consequences. The Seneca leader Cornplanter called the colonizers the 'town destroyers'. **He described how, during the destruction and suffering that troops wreaked on the western Iroquois, Seneca 'women look behind them and turn pale, and our children cling close to the necks of their mothers'.**
* "Despite the primary use of settler militias, President Washington insisted that the new government had to develop a professional army that would enhance US prestige in the eyes of European countries. He also thought that the cost of using mercenaries, at four times that of regular troops, was too high. 
* "**But whenever regular troops were sent into the Ohio Country, the Indigenous resisters drove them out.** Reluctantly, Washington resigned himself to the necessity of using what were essentially vicious killers to terrorize the region, thereby annexing land that could be sold to settlers. *The sale of confiscated land was the primary revenue source for the new government.*
* "In late 1791, the War Department notified Ohio squatters to call out their rangers for an offensive. Major General 'Mad' Anthony Wayne was charged with restructuring the units of the army under his command to function as irregular forces. Washington and other officials were aware that Wayne was unreliable and an alcoholic, but it appeared that such characteristics might be useful for the dirty war ahead. Between 1792 and 1794, Wayne put together a combined force of regulars with a large contingent of experienced rangers. He enthusiastically embraced such counterinsurgent tactics as destroying food supplies and murdering civilians.
* "Among the fifteen hundred mounted rangers in the first mission was the talented William Wells with his group of rangers. When he was thirteen, Wells had been captured by the Miamis and then had lived with them for nine years, marrying Little Turtle's daughter. Under his father-in-law's command, Wells had fought the invading settlers and the US Army. In 1792, Wells was chosen to represent the Miami Nation in a negotiation with the United States, but on arrival for talks he encountered a brother from the family he had been separated from for a decade. He was persuaded to return to Kentucky and served as a ranger for the US Army.
* "Wayne's troops and rangers managed to enter the Ohio Country and establish a base they called Fort Defiance--in northwestern Ohio--in what had been the heart of the Indigenous alliance led by Little Turtle. Wayne then made an ultimatum to the Shawnees: 'In pity to your innocent women and children, come and prevent the further effusion of your blood'. 
* "The Shawnee leader Blue Jacket refused submission, and the US forces began destroying Shawnee villages and fields and murdering women, children, and old men. On August 20, 1794, at Fallen Timbers, the main Shawnee fighting force was overpowered. Even after this US victory, the rangers continued for three days laying waste to Shawnee houses and cornfields. After creating a fifty-mile swath of devastation, the invading forces returned to Fort Defiance. The defeat at Fallen Timbers was a severe blow to the Indigenous nations of the Ohio Country, but they would reorganize their resistance during the following decade.
* "The US conquest of southern Ohio was formalized in the 1795 Treaty of Greenville--a victory based on vicious irregular warfare. The nations of the region no longer had the British and the French and the settlers to play against one another, but rather were now faced with the determined imperialist thrust of an independent republic that had to coddle settlers if they were to recruit any into their service."

### Tecumseh p.84

* "Over the following decade, more settlers poured over the Appalachians, squatting on Indigenous lands, and even building towns, anticipating that the US military, land speculators, and civilian institutions would follow.
* "In the Ohio Country, **the Shawnee brothers Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa** began building a concerted Indigenous resistance in the early nineteenth century. From their organizing center, Prophet's Town, founded in 1807, Tenskwatawa and his fellow organizers traveled throughout Shawnee towns calling for a return to their cultural roots, which had been eroded by the assimilation of Anglo-­American practices and trade goods, especially alcohol. *Abuse of alcohol (and drugs) is epidemic like diseases in communities subjected to colonization or other forms of domination, particularly in crowded and miserable refugee situations*. 
* "This is the case in all parts of the world, not only among Native peoples of North America. **Alcohol was an item in the tool kit of colonialists who made it readily and cheaply available.** *Christian missionaries often took advantage of these dysfunctional conditions to convert, offering not only food and housing but also discipline to avoid alcohol.* **But this was itself a form of colonial submission.**
* "Significantly, Tecumseh did not limit his vision to the Ohio Country but also envisaged organizing all the peoples west to the Mississippi, north into the Great Lakes region, and south to the Gulf of Mexico. He visited other Indigenous nations, calling for unity in defiance of the squatters' presence on their lands. 
* "He presented a program that would end all sales of Indigenous land to settlers. Only then would settlers' migrations in search of cheap land cease and the establishment of the United States in the West be prevented. An alliance of all Indigenous nations could then manage Indigenous lands as a federation. His program, strategy, and philosophy mark the beginning of pan-Indigenous movements in Anglo-colonized North America that established a model for future resistance. 
* "Joseph Brant and Pontiac had originated the strategy in the 1780s, but Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa forged a pan-Indigenous framework made all the more potent by combining Indigenous spirituality and politics while respecting the particular religions and languages of each nation.
* "The evolving Indigenous alliance posed a serious barrier to continued Anglo-American squatting and land speculation and acquisitions in the trans-Appalachian region. With previous Indigenous resistance movements, such as those led by Little Turtle and Blue Jacket, during peace negotiations in the wake of ruinous US wars of annihilation, leaders of factions had become 'agency chiefs' who agreed to land sales without the consent of those they purported to represent. 
* "The colonized communities had fallen into economic dependency on trade goods and federal annuities, incurring debts that led to the forfeiture of what land remained in their hands. **The emerging younger generation was contemptuous of such chiefs, whom they perceived as selling out their people.** Anglo-American settlers and speculators exerted increased pressure and issued new threats of annihilation, provoking anger and calls for retaliation but also a renewed spirit of resistance.
* "By 1810, new Indigenous alliances challenged squatter settlers in the Indiana and Illinois Territories at a time when war between the United States and Great Britain was looming. Fearing that the British would unite with the Indigenous alliances to prevent the US imperialist goal to dominate the continent, these settlers drafted a petition to President James Madison, demanding that the government act preemptively: 'The safety of the persons and property of this frontier can never be effectually secured, but by the breaking up of the combination formed by the Shawnee Prophet on the Wabash'.
* "In 1809, Indiana's territorial governor, William Henry Harrison, badgered and bribed a few destitute Delaware, Miami, and Potawatomi individuals to sign the Treaty of Fort Wayne, according to which these nations would hand over their land in what is now southern Indiana for an annual annuity. Tecumseh promptly condemned the treaty and those who signed it without the approval of the peoples they represented. Harrison met with Tecumseh at Vincennes in 1810, along with other delegates of the allied Shawnee, Kickapoo, Wyandot, Peoria, Ojibwe, Potawatomi, and Winnebago Nations. The Shawnee leader informed Harrison that he was leaving for the South to bring the Muskogees, Choctaws, and Chickasaws into the alliance.
* "Harrison, now convinced that Tecumseh's brother Tenskwatawa, the Prophet, was the source of the renewed Indigenous militancy, reasoned that destroying Prophet's Town would crush the resistance. *It would present a clear choice to the many Indigenous people who supported the militant leaders: cede more land to the United States and take the money and trade goods, or suffer further annihilation.* 
* "He decided to strike in Tecumseh's absence. Having served as General Wayne's aide-de-camp in the Fallen Timbers attacks, Harrison knew how to keep his regular army forces from being ambushed. He assembled Indiana and Kentucky rangers--seasoned Indian killers--and some US Army regulars. 
* "At the site of what is today Terre Haute, Indiana, the soldiers constructed Fort Harrison on Shawnee land--a symbol of their intention to remain permanently. The people in Prophet's Town were aware of the military advance, but Tecumseh had warned them not to be drawn into a fight, because the alliance was not yet ready for war. 
* "Tenskwatawa sent scouts to observe the enemy's movements. The US forces arrived on the edge of Prophet's Town at dawn on November 6, 1811. Seeing no alternative to overriding his brother's instructions, Tenskwatawa led an assault before dawn the following morning. Only after some two hundred of the Indigenous residents had fallen did the troops overpower them, burning the town, destroying the granary, and looting, even digging up graves and mutilating the corpses. This was the famous 'battle' of Tippecanoe that made Harrison a frontier hero to the settlers and later helped elect him president.
* "The US Army's destruction of the capital of the alliance outraged Indigenous peoples all over the Old Northwest, prompting fighters of the Kickapoos, Winnebagos, Potawatamis, and even Creeks from the South to converge on a British garrison at Fort Malden in Canada to obtain supplies with which to fight. *Contrary to the false US assumption that Tecumseh was a mere tool of the British, he had been unwilling to enter into a British alliance because Europeans had proved so unreliable in the past*. 
* "But now he spoke for unified and coordinated Indigenous-led war on the United States that the British could support (if they wished) but not control. President Madison, speaking to Congress in seeking a declaration of war against Great Britain, argued: 'In reviewing the conduct of Great Britain toward the United States our attention is necessarily drawn to the warfare just renewed by the savages on one of our extensive frontiers--a warfare which is known to spare neither age nor sex and to be distinguished by features peculiarly shocking to humanity.'
* "During the summer of 1812, the Indigenous alliance struck US installations and squatter settlements with little help from the British. The US forts at present-day Detroit and Dearborn fell. Among the inhabitants of Fort Dearborn, Kentucky ranger William Wells was killed and his body mutilated as that of a despised turncoat. 
* "In the fall, Indigenous forces attacked Anglo-American squatter settlements all over Illinois and Indiana Territories. The US rangers attempting to track and kill the Indigenous fighters found destroyed and abandoned Anglo-American settlements, with thousands of settlers driven from their homes. 
* "In response, Harrison turned the militias loose on Indigenous fields and villages with no restrictions on their behavior. The head of the Kentucky militia mustered two thousand armed and mounted volunteers to destroy Indigenous towns near today's Peoria, Illinois, but without success. 
* "A reversal came in the fall of 1813, when Tecumseh was killed in the Battle of the Thames and the Indigenous army was destroyed. Throughout the eighteen-month war, militias and rangers attacked Indigenous civilians and agricultural resources, leaving behind starving refugees.

### Assault on the Cherokee Nation p.87

* "In the unconquered Indigenous region of the Old Southwest, parallel resistance took place during the two decades following US independence--with similar tragic results--thanks to extirpative settler warfare. 
* "Tennessee (formerly claimed, but not settled, by the British colony of North Carolina) was carved out of the larger Cherokee Nation and became a state in 1796." The eastern part of Tennessee--especially the area around what is now Knoxville--was a war zone.
* "The mostly Scots-Irish squatters--attempting to secure and expand their settlements--were at war with the resistant Cherokees called 'Chickamaugas'. The settlers hated both the Indigenous people whom they were attempting to displace as well as the newly formed federal government. 
* "In 1784, a group of North Carolina settlers, led by settler-ranger John Sevier, had seceded from western Carolina and established the independent country of Franklin with Sevier as president. Neither North Carolina nor the federal government had exerted any control over the settlements in the eastern Tennessee Valley region. 
* "In the summer of 1788, Sevier ordered an unprovoked, preemptive attack on the Chickamauga towns, killing thirty villagers and forcing the survivors to flee south. **Sevier's actions formed a template for settler-federal relations, with the settlers implementing the federal government's final solution, while the federal government feigned an appearance of limiting settler invasions of Indigenous lands.**
* "Facing the fierce resistance of Indigenous nations in the Ohio Country and the fighting between the Muskogee Nation and the state of Georgia, Washington's administration sought to contain Indigenous resistance in the South. 
* "Yet now the settlers were provoking the Cherokees in what would soon be the state of Tennessee. Secretary of War Knox claimed to believe that the thickness of settlers' developmenti--converting Indigenous hunting grounds into farms--would slowly overwhelm the Indigenous nations and drive them out. He advised the squatters' leaders to continue building, which would attract more illegal settlers. This disingenuous view ignored the fact that the Indigenous farmers were well aware of the intentions of the settlers to destroy them and seize their territories.
* "In the 1785 Treaty of Hopewell between the federal government and the Cherokee Nation, the United States had agreed to restrict settlement to the east of the Blue Ridge Mountains. **The several thousand squatter families who claimed nearly a million acres of land in precisely that zone were not about to abide by the treaty.** 
* "Knox saw the situation as a showdown with the settlers and a test of federal authority west of the mountain chains, from Canada to Spanish Florida. The settlers did not believe that the federal government meant to protect their interests, which encouraged them to go it alone. In the face of constant attacks, the Cherokees were desperate to halt the destruction of their towns and fields. Many were starving, more without shelter, on the move as refugees, with only the Chickamauga fighters as a protective force fighting off the seasoned ranger-settler Indian killers. 
* "In July 1791, the Cherokees reluctantly signed the Treaty of Holston, agreeing to abandon any claims to land on which the Franklin settlements sat in return for an annual annuity of $100,000 from the federal government.
* "The United States did nothing to halt the flow of squatters into Cherokee territory as the boundary was drawn in the treaty. In 1792--a year after the treaty was signed--war broke out. The Chickamaugas--under the leadership of Dragging Canoe--attacked squatters, even laying siege to Nashville. The war continued for two years, with five hundred Chickamauga fighters joined by Muskogees and a contingent of Shawnees from Ohio, led by Cheeseekau, one of Tecumseh's brothers, who was later killed in the fighting. 
* "The settlers organized an offensive against the Chickamaugas. The federal In­ dian agent attempted to persuade the Chickamaugas to stop fighting, warning that the frontier settlers were 'always dreadful, not only to the warriors, but to the innocent and helpless women and children, and old men'. The agent also warned the settlers against attacking Indigenous towns, but he had to order the militia to disperse a mob of three hundred settlers, who, as he wrote, out of 'a mistaken zeal to serve their country' had gathered to destroy 'as many as they could of the Cherokee towns.' 
* "Sevier and his rangers invaded the Chickamaugas' towns in September 1793, with a stated mission of total destruction. Although forbidden by the federal agent to attack the villages, Sevier gave orders for a scorched-earth offensive.
* "By choosing to attack at harvest time, Sevier intended to starve out the residents. The strategy worked. Soon after, the federal agent reported to the secretary of war that the region was pacified, with no Indigenous actions since 'the visit General Sevier paid the [Cherokee] nation'. A year later, Sevier demanded absolute submission from the Chickamauga villages lest they be wiped out completely. 
* "**Receiving no response, a month later 1,750 Franklin rangers attacked two villages, burning all the buildings and fields--again near the harvest--and shooting those who tried to flee. Sevier then repeated his demand for submission, requiring the Chickamaugas to abandon their towns for the woods, taking only what they could transport. He wrote: 'War will cost the United States much money, and some lives, but it will destroy the existence of your people, as a nation, forever'. The remaining Chickamauga villages agreed to allow the settlers to remain in Cherokee country.**
* "In squatter settlements, ruthless leaders like Sevier were not the exception but the rule. **Once they had full control and got what they wanted, they made their peace with the federal government, which in turn depended on their actions to expand the republic's territory. Sevier went on to serve as a US representative from North Carolina and as governor of Tennessee. To this day, such men are idolized as great heroes, embodying the essence of the 'American spirit'.** A bronze statue of John Sevier in his ranger uniform stands today in the National Statuary Hall of the US Capitol.

### Muskogee Resistance p.90

* "The Muskogee Nation officially had remained neutral in the war between the Anglo-American settlers and the British monarchy. Nonetheless, many individual Muskogees had taken the opportunity to raid and harass squatters within their national territories in Georgia, Tennessee, and South Carolina. 
* "When the United States was formed, the Muskogee Nation turned to Spanish Florida for an alliance in trying to stop the flow of squatters into their territory. Spain had an interest in the alliance as a buffer to its holdings, which at the time included the lower Mississippi and the city of New Orleans. The squatters believed that the Muskogees and the Spanish officials, as well as the British, were in cahoots to keep them out of western Georgia and present-day Alabama and considered the Muskogee Nation to be the main barrier to their permanent settlement in the region, particularly Georgia. The Muskogees called the squatters *ecunnaunuxulgee* -'people greedily grasping after the lands of the red people'.
* "The federal government negotiated with the Muskogee Nation for a new boundary and for more settlements and trade, in exchange for $60,000 a year in goods. **The squatters did everything they could to provoke the Muskogees to war, while ignoring the treaty's provisions.**
* "The squatters slaughtered hundreds of deer in the Muskogee deer parks, with the intention of wiping out the livelihood of Muskogee hunters, who also made up the resistance forces. *But the War Department was complicit, using money due to the Muskogees under the treaty to divide them by bribing leaders (*miccos*) and thus isolating the insurgents from their communities.* 
* "Eighty Muskogee fighters joined the Chickamaugas when they were still fighting, and together they attacked the Cumberland district of Tennessee in early 1792, while others struck Georgia squatters in Muskogee territory. It was then that Shawnee delegates, sent by Tecumseh, visited from the Ohio Country to encourage the Muskogees to drive the squatters from their lands, as the Shawnees had done successfully up to that time. Secretary of War Knox wrote to the federal agent in Georgia that he knew the Muskogee militants were 'a Banditti, and do not implicate the whole nor any considerable part of that Nation. The hostilities of the Individuals arise from their own disposition, and are not probably dictated, either by the Chiefs, or by any Towns or other respectable classes of the Indians.'
* "By this time, in the process of the preceding British colonization and continuing with US colonization of the Muskogee Nation and other southeastern Indigenous nations, **an Indigenous client class--called *compradors* by Africans, *caciques* in Spanish-colonized America--essential to colonialist projects, was firmly in place. 
* "This privileged class was dependent on their colonial masters for their personal wealth. This class division wracked the traditional relatively egalitarian and democratic Indigenous societies internally. This small elite in the Southeast embraced the enslavement of Africans, and a few even became affluent planters in the style of southern planters, mainly through intermarriage with Anglos.** 
* "The trading posts established by US merchants further divided Muskogee society, pulling many deeply into the US economy through dependency and debt, and away from the Spanish and British trading firms, which had previously left their lands undisturbed. 
* "This method of colonization by co-optation and debt proved effective wherever employed by colonial powers in the world, but only when it was accompanied by extreme violence at any sign of indigenous insurgency. The United States moved across North America in this manner. While most Muskogees continued to follow their traditional democratic ways in their villages, the elite Muskogees were making decisions and compromises on their behalf that would bear tragic consequences for them all.
* "Federal authorities in 1793 identified five hundred Muskogee towns where they believed the majority of insurgents resided. Secretary of War Knox called on the Georgia militia for federal service. The federal Indian agent notified the War Department that the settlers were set on assaulting the Muskogees and asked that a thousand federal troops be deployed to occupy the insurgent Muskogee towns. Although the War Department rejected that idea and war was postponed, the restless Georgian militiamen deserted after having rushed to the Muskogee territory to loot, burn, and kill, only to be forced to wait. Persistent squatter attacks on Muskogee farmers, traders, and towns continued.
* "During the winter of 1793-94, Georgia border squatters formed an armed group of landless settlers. The leader, Elijah Clarke, was a veteran Indian killer and had been a major general in the Georgia militia during the war of independence, in which he commanded rangers to destroy Indigenous towns and fields. As a US patriot hero, Clarke was certain that his former troops would never take up arms against him. Clarke and his rangers declared the independence of their own republic, but Georgia state authorities captured him and destroyed the rebel stronghold. **Still, Clarke's action sent a strong message to state and federal authorities that landless squatters were determined to take Indigenous lands.** They would get the leader they needed for that purpose a decade later. Meanwhile, the elite of the Muskogee towns were successful in marginalizing the insurgents, while the federal government increased grants, and the wealthy class of Muskogees established trading posts, making whiskey cheaply available to impoverished Muskogees.

### The Die is Cast p.92

* "The successful settler intrusion into western Georgia made Alabama and Mississippi the next objectives for the rapidly expanding slave-worked plantation economy, which, along with land sales of occupied Indigenous lands by private speculators, was essential to the US economy as a whole. 
* "The plantation economy required vast swaths of land for cash crops, even before cotton was king, leaving in its wake destroyed Indigenous national territories and Anglo settlers who would fight and die driving out the Indigenous communities yet remain landless themselves, moving on to the next frontier to try again. 
* "US colonization produced the subsequent hideous slavery-based rule of the Old Southwest, which would flourish for seven more decades. Unlike in the Ohio Country, the Washington administration avoided force and in doing so alienated settlers in the region. By preventing them from wiping out the Muskogees, the federal government was seen as the enemy, just as the British authority had been for an earlier generation of determined settlers. 
* "But that would soon change with the Muskogee War of 1813-14, narrated in the following chapter, in which, as Robert V. Remini puts it in *Andrew Jackson and His Indian Wars*, 'Tennessee frontiersman Andrew Jackson, commanding both regular Army troops and frontiersmen, personally guaranteed that the Creeks would feel the full brunt of total war'.
* "During 1810-1815, then, two parallel wars were ongoing. One in the Ohio Country--the Old Northwest--which ended with the defeat of the Tecumseh-led alliance, and the other the war against the Muskogee Nation in 1813-14. 
* "Unlike the 1812-15 war between Britain and the United States, with which these wars overlapped, the situation did not return to things being as they had been before, but rather culminated in the elimination of Indigenous power east of the Mississippi. US conquest was not determined by the defeat of the British in battle in 1815, but rather by genocidal war and forced removal.
* "US leaders brought counterinsurgency out of the pre-independence period into the new republic, imprinting on the fledgling federal army a way of war with formidable consequences for the continent and the world. Counterinsurgent warfare and ethnic cleansing targeting Indigenous civilians continued to define US war making throughout the nineteenth century, with markers such as the three US counterinsurgent wars against the Seminoles through the Sand Creek Massacre of 1864 to Wounded Knee in 1890. 
* "Early on, regular armies had incorporated these strategies and tactics as a way of war to which it often turned, although frequently the regular army simply stood by while local militias and settlers acting on their own used terror against Indigenous noncombatants.
* "Irregular warfare would be waged west of the Mississippi as it had been earlier against the Abenakis, Cherokees, Shawnees, Muskogees, and even Christian Indians. In the Civil War, these methods played a prominent role on both sides. 
* "Confederate regular forces, Confederate guerrillas such as William Quantrill, and General Sherman for the Union all engaged in waging total war against civilians. The pattern would continue in US military interventions overseas, from the Philippines and Cuba to Central America, Korea, Vietnam, Iraq, and Afghanistan. 
* "The cumulative effect goes beyond simply the habitual use of military means and becomes the very basis for US American identity. The Indian-fighting frontiersmen and the 'valiant' settlers in their circled covered wagons are the iconic images of that identity. The continued popularity of, and respect for, the genocidal sociopath Andrew Jackson is another indicator. Actual men such as Robert Rogers, Daniel Boone, John Sevier, and David Crockett, as well as fictitious ones created by James Fenimore Cooper and other best-selling writers, call to mind D. H. Lawrence's 'myth of the essential white American'--that the 'essential American soul' is a killer.

-----------------------------------

## Chapter 6: The Last of the Mohicans and Andrew Jackson's White Republic p.95

* "In 1803, the Jefferson administrationi--without consulting any affected Indigenous nation--purchased the Louisiana Territory from Napoleon Bonaparte. Louisiana comprised 828,000 square miles, and its addition doubled the size of the United States. The territory encompassed all or part of multiple Indigenous nations, including the Sioux, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Crow, Pawnee, Osage, and Comanche, among other peoples of the bison. 
* "It also included the area that would soon be designated Indian Territory (Oklahoma), the site of relocation of Indigenous peoples from west of the Mississippi. Fifteen future states would emerge from the taking: all of present-day Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska; Minnesota west of the Mississippi; most of North and South Dakota; northeastern New Mexico and North Texas; the portions of Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado east of the Continental Divide; and Louisiana west ofthe Mississippi River, including the city of New Orleans. 
* "The territory pressed against lands occupied by Spain, including Texas and all the territory west of the Continental Divide to the Pacific Ocean. These would soon be next on the US annexation list.
* "At the time, many US Americans saw the purchase as a strategic means of averting war with France while securing commerce on the Mississippi. But it was not long before some began eyeing it for settlement and others proposing an 'exchange' of Indigenous lands in the Old Northwest and Old Southwest for lands west of the Mississippi. Before turning to conquest and colonization west of the Mississippi, the slavery-based rule of the Southeast would be ethnically cleansed of Indigenous peoples. The man for the job was Andrew Jackson.

### Career Building Through Genocide

* "**Neither superior technology nor an overwhelming number of settlers made up the mainspring of the birth of the United States or the spread of its power over the entire world. Rather, the chief cause was the colonialist settler-state's willingness to eliminate whole civilizations of people in order to possess their land.**
* "This trend of extermination became common in the twentieth century as the United States seized military and economic control of the world, capping five hundred years of European colonialism and imperialism. The canny Prussian Otto von Bismarck, founder and first chancellor (1871-90) of the German empire, was prescient in observing, 'The colonization of North America has been the decisive fact of the modern world'. Jefferson was its architect. Andrew Jackson was the implementer of the final solution for the Indigenous peoples east of the Mississippi.
* "Andrew Jackson was an influential Tennessee land speculator, politician, and wealthy owner of a slave-worked plantation, the Hermitage. He was also a veteran Indian killer.
* "Jackson's family personified the Protestant Scots-Irish migration to the borderlands of empires. Jackson's Scots-Irish parents and two older brothers arrived in Pennsylvania from County Antrim in Northern Ireland in 1765. The Jacksons soon moved to a Scots-Irish community on the North Carolina border with South Carolina. Jackson's father died after a logging accident a few weeks before Andrew's birth in 1767. Life was hard for a single mother and three children on the frontier. At age thirteen, with little education, Jackson became a courier for the local regiment of the frontier secessionists in their war of independence from Britain. 
* "Jackson's mother and his brothers died during the war, leaving him an orphan. He worked at various jobs, then studied law and was admitted to the bar in the Western District of North Carolina, which would later become the state of Tennessee. 
* "Through his legal work--most of which related to disputed land claims--he acquired a plantation near Nashville worked by 150 slaves. He helped usher in Tennessee as a state in 1796, then was elected as its US senator, an office he quit after a year to become a judge in the Tennessee Supreme Court for six years.
* "As the most notorious land speculator in western Tennessee, Jackson enriched himself by acquiring a portion of the Chickasaw Nation's land. It was in 1801 that Jackson first took command of the Tennessee militia as a colonel and began his Indian-killing military career. 
* "After his brutal war of annihilation against the Muskogee Nation, Jackson continued building his national military and political career by tackling the resistant Seminoles in what are known as **the Seminole Wars.** 
* "In 1836, during the second of these wars, US Army general Thomas S. Jesup captured the popular Anglo atitude toward the Seminoles: 'The country can be rid of them only by exterminating them'. By then Jackson was finishing his second term as the most popular president in US history to that date, and the policy of genocide was embedded in the highest office of the US government. 
* "In the Southeast, the Choctaws and Chickasaws turned exclusively to US traders once the new US republic effectively cut off access to the Spanish in Florida. Soon they were trapped in the US trading world, in which they would run up debts and then have no way to pay other than by ceding land to creditors who were often acting as agents of the federal government. This was no accidental outcome but was foreseen and encouraged by Jefferson. 
* "In 1805, the Choctaws ceded most of their lands to the United States for $50,000, and the Chickasaws relinquished all their lands north of the Tennessee River for $20,000. Many Choctaws and Chickasaws thus became landless participants in the expanding plantation economy, burdened by debts and poverty.
* "The division of the Muskogee (Creek) Nation and the rise of Andrew Jackson as a result led to his eventual elevation to the presidency and carrying out of the final solution--elimination of all the Indigenous communities east of the Mississippi through forced removal. After the Choctaws and Chickasaws lost most of their territories, only the Muskogees continued to resist the United States.
* "The Muskogee Nation was a federation of autonomous towns located in the valleys of the many rivers that crisscross what are now the states of Alabama, Tennessee, and parts of Georgia and Florida. The Lower Creeks inhabited and farmed in the eastern part of this region watered by the Chattahoochee, Flint, and Apalachicola Rivers. Meanwhile the Upper Creeks lived west of them, in the valleys of the Coosa, Tallapoosa and Alabama Rivers. 
* "**Following US independence, the Muskogees were divided by settler colonialism.** Lower Creek villages became economically dependent on settlers and *emulated settlers' values, including ownership of African slaves*. 
* "This was largely due to two decades of diligent work on the part of US Indian agent Benjamin Hawkins. He was in charge of the US government's 'civilization' project, lending the settler moniker 'Five Civilized Tribes' to describe the great agricultural nations of the Southeast. 
* "Hawkins's mission was to instill Euro-American values and practices in Indigenous peoples--including the profit motive, privatization of property, debt, accumulation of wealth by a few, and slavery--allowing settlers to gain the land and assimilate the Muskogees. 
* At the time of independence, hundreds of settlers were squatting illegally on lands of Muskogees of the Lower Creek towns, and that is where Hawkins concentrated, leaving the Muskogees upriver alone. However, traditionalists among the Upper Creeks, who had allied with Tecumseh and the Shawnee confederation, understood that they would be next, as they saw the twenty-year Hawkins project transforming some citizens of the Lower Creek towns into wealthy plantation and slave owners, while the majority became landless and poor.
* Traditionalist fighters, called Red Sticks due to the color of their wooden spears, began an offensive against collaborating Upper Creeks and settlers that ended in civil war during 1813. The Red Sticks created chaos that affected Hawkins's scheme, as they attacked anyone associated with his program. 
* "Their effectiveness, however, provoked a genocidal counteroffensive not officially authorized by the federal government, led by Andrew Jackson who was then head of the Tennessee militias. Jackson threatened to form his own mercenary army to drive the Muskogees 'into the ocean' if the government failed to eradicate the insurgents. 
* "Although Jackson and his fellow Tennesseans made it clear that their goal was extermination of the Muskogee Nation, their rhetoric claimed self-defense. In a series of search-and-destroy missions over three months prior to the final assault on the Red Sticks, Jackson's mercenaries killed hundreds of Muskogee civilians, pursuing without mercy even homeless and starved refugees seeking shelter and safety. 
* "By this point, the Red Sticks had killed most of the Muskogee Nation livestock both to deprive US soldiers of food and to rid Muskogee culture of the colonizers' influence.
* "Both Shawnee fighters and Africans who had freed themselves from slavery allied with the Red Sticks. With all their families they set up a fortified encampment at Tohopeka at the Horseshoe Bend on the Tallapoosa River in present-day Alabama. 
* "Jackson proceeded to mobilize Lower Creek fighters and some Cherokee allies against the Red Sticks. In March 1814, with seven hundred mounted militiamen and six hundred Cherokee and Lower Creek fighters, Jackson's armies attacked the Red Stick stronghold. 
* "The mercenaries captured three hundred Red Stick wives and children and held them as hostages to induce Muskogee surrender. Of a thousand Red Stick and allied insurgents, eight hundred were killed. Jackson lost forty-nine men.
* "In the aftermath of 'the Battle of Horseshoe Bend', as it is known in US military annals, **Jackson's troops fashioned reins for their horses' bridles from skin stripped from the Muskogee bodies**, and they saw to it that souvenirs from the corpses were given 'to the ladies of Tennessee'. 
* "Following the slaughter, Jackson justified his troops' actions: 'The fiends of the Tallapoosa will no longer murder our women and children, or disturb the quiet of our borders...They have disappeared from the face of the Earth...How lamentable it is that the path to peace should lead through blood, and over the carcasses of the slain! But it is in the dispensation of that providence, which inflicts partial evil to produce general good.'
* "Horseshoe Bend marked the end of the Muskogees' resistance in their original homeland. As historian Alan Brinkley has observed, Jackson's political fortunes depended on the fate of the Indians-­that is, their eradication.
* "The surrender document the Muskogee Nation was forced to sign in 1814--the Treaty of Fort Jackson--asserted that they had lost under 'principles of national justice and honorable war'. Andrew Jackson--the only US negotiator of the treaty--**insisted on nothing less than the total destruction of the Muskogee Nation, which the Muskogees had no power to refuse or negotiate.** 
* "These terms of **total surrender shocked the small group of Muskogee plantation and slave owners, who thought that they had been thoroughly accepted by the US Americans. They had fought alongside the Anglo militias against the majority Red Sticks in the war just concluded, yet all Muskogees were now to be punished equally.** 
* "To no avail did the 'friendlies' prostrate themselves before Jackson at the treaty meeting, begging that they and their holdings be spared. **Jackson told them that the extreme punishment exacted upon them should teach all those who would try to oppose US domination. 'We bleed our enemies in such cases,' he explained, 'to give them their senses'.i
* "Military historian Grenier observes that 'Jackson's *bleeding* of the Muskogees marks a culminating point in American military history as the end of the Transappalachian East's Indian wars...The conquest of the West was not guaranteed by defeating the British Army in battle in 1815, but by defeating and driving the Indians from their homelands. 
* "The treaty obliged surviving Muskogees to move onto western remnants of their homelands, and Jackson--far from being reprimanded for his genocidal methods--won a commission from President James Madison as major general in the US Army. 
* "The territory that would become Alabama and Mississippi now lay open to Anglo-American settlement--an ominous green light to the expansion of plantation slavery. **The Muskogee War thus inscribed a US policy of ethnic cleansing onto an entire Indigenous population.** The policy originated by Andrew Jackson in that war would be reconfirmed politically when he became president in 1828. 
* "The Upper Creek Muskogees who remained in Alabama surrendered to Jackson and ceded twenty-three million acres of their ancestral lands to the United States in the Treaty of Fort Jackson. 
* "The Red Sticks, however, joined the resistant Seminole Nation in the Florida Everglades and three more decades of Muskogee resistance ensued. 
* "During this period, Anglo-American slave owners--and Andrew Jackson in particular--were determined to destroy the safe havens that Seminole towns offered to Africans who escaped from slavery. **The Seminole Nation had not existed under that name prior to European colonization.** 
* "The ancestral towns of the Indigenous people who became known as Seminoles were located along rivers in a large area of what is today Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, and the Florida Panhandle. In the mid-1700s, Wakapuchasee (Cowkeeper) and his people separated from the Coweta Muskogees and moved south into what was then Spanish-occupied Florida. 
* "As Spain, Britain, and later the United States decimated Indigenous towns throughout the Southeast, survivors, including self-emancipated Africans, established a refuge in Seminole territory in Spanish Florida in the Everglades. European incursions came in the form of military attacks, disease, and disruption of trade routes, causing collapse and realignments within and between the towns.
* 
* "The Seminole Nation was born of resistance and included the vestiges of dozens of Indigenous communities as well as escaped Africans, as the Seminole towns served as refuge. 
* "In the Caribbean and Brazil--people in such escapee communities were called Maroons--but in the United States the liberated Africans were absorbed into Seminole Nation culture. Then, as now, Seminoles spoke the Muskogee language, and much later (in 1957) the US government designated them an 'Indian tribe'. The Seminoles were one of the 'Five Civilized Tribes' ordered from their national homelands in the 1830s to Indian Territory--later made part of the state of Oklahoma.
* "**The United States waged three wars against the Seminole Nation between 1817 and 1858.** 
* "The prolonged and fierce Second Seminole War (1835-42) was the longest foreign war waged by the United States up to the Vietnam War. 
* "The US military further developed its army, naval, and marine capabilities in again adopting a counterinsurgency strategy--in this case against the Seminole towns in the Everglades. 
* "**Once again US forces targeted civilians, destroyed food supplies, and sought to destroy every last insurgent.** 
* "What US military annals call the First Seminole War (1817-19) began when US authorities entered Spanish Florida illegally in an attempt to recover US plantation owners' 'property': former African slaves. The Seminoles repelled the invasion. 
* "In 1818, President James Monroe ordered Andrew Jackson--then a major general in the US Army--to lead three thousand soldiers into Florida to crush the Seminoles and retrieve the Africans among them. The expedition destroyed a number of Seminole settlements and then captured the Spanish fort at Pensacola, bringing down the Spanish government. 
* "But it failed in destroying Seminole guerrilla resistance and the Seminoles did not agree to hand over any former slaves. 'Armed occupation was the true way of settling a conquered country,' Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri said at the time, reflecting a popular blend of militarism and white-supremacist Christian identity. 'The children of Israel entered the promised land, with implements of husbandry in one hand, and the weapons of war in the other' 
* "The United States annexed Florida as a territory in 1819, opening it to Anglo­American settlement. In 1821 Jackson was appointed military commander of Florida Territory. The Seminoles never sued for peace, were never conquered, and never signed a treaty with the United States, and although some were rounded up and sent in 1832 to Oklahoma, where they were given a land base, the Seminole Nation has never ceased to exist in the Everglades.

### The Mythical Foundation of Settler Patriotism p.102

* "Between 1814 and 1824, three-fourths of present-day Alabama and Florida, a third of Tennessee, a fifth of Georgia and Mississippi, and parts of Kentucky and North Carolina became the private property of white settlers--all of the land seized from Indigenous farmers. 
* "In 1824, the first permanent US colonial institution was established. First **named the Office of Indian Affairs and placed tellingly within the Department of War**, the agency was transferred to the Department of Interior twenty-five years later following the annexation of half of Mexico. In making this transfer, the federal government showed overconfidence in assuming that armed Indigenous resistance to US aggression and colonization had ended. Such resistance would continue for another half century.
* "Whereas white supremacy had been the working rationalization for British theft of Indigenous lands and for European enslavement of Africans, the bid for independence by what became the United States of America was more problematic. 
* "Democracy, equality, and equal rights do not fit well with dominance of one race by another, much less with genocide, settler colonialism, and empire. It was during the 1820s--the beginning of the era of Jacksonian settler democracy--that **the unique US origin myth evolved reconciling rhetoric with reality**. Novelist James Fenimore Cooper was among its initial scribes.
	* "Cooper's reinvention of the birth of the United States in his novel *The Last of the Mohicans* has become the official US origin story. Herman Melville called Cooper 'our national novelist'. 
	* "Cooper was the wealthy son of a US congressman, a land speculator who built Cooperstown--named after himself--in upstate New York where he grew up. His hometown was christened all-American with the establishment of the National Baseball Hall of Fame there in 1936, during the Depression. 
	* "Expelled from Yale, Cooper joined the navy, then married and began writing. In 1823, he published *The Pioneers*, the first book in his 'Leatherstocking Tales' series; the other four being *The Last of the Mohicans*, *The Prairie*, *The Pathfinder*, and *The Deerslayer*--the last published in 1841. Each featured the character Natty Bumppo, also called variously, depending on his age, Leatherstocking, Pathfinder, or Deerslayer. 
	* "Bumppo is a British settler on land appropriated from the Delaware Nation and is buddies with its fictional Delaware leader Chingachgoo--the 'last Mohican' in the myth.
	* Together the 'Leatherstocking Tales' narrate the mythical forging of the new country from the 1754-63 French and Indian War in *The Last ofthe Mohicans* to the settlement of the plains by migrants traveling by wagon train from Tennessee. At the end of the saga, Bumppo dies a very old man on the edge of the Rocky Mountains, as he gazes east.
* "*The Last of the Mohicans*--published in 1826--was a best seller throughout the nineteenth century and has been in print continuously since, with two Hollywood movies based on the story, the most recent made in 1992, the Columbus Quincentennial. 
* "Cooper devised a fictional counterpoint of celebration to the dark underbelly of the new American nation--the birth of something new and wondrous, literally, the US American race, a new people born of the merger of the best of both worlds, the Native and the European, not biological merger but something more ephemeral, involving the dissolving of the Indian. 
* "In the novel, Cooper has the last of the 'noble' and 'pure' Natives die off as nature would have it, with the 'last Mohican' handing the continent over to Hawkeye, the nativized settler, his adopted son. This convenient fantasy could be seen as quaint at best if it were not for its deadly staying power. 
* "Cooper had much to do with creating the US origin myth to which generations of historians have dedicated themselves, fortifying what historian Francis Jennings has described as 'exclusion from the process of formation of American society and culture'.
	> *In the first place they [US historians] exclude Amerindians (also Afro-Americans) from participation--except as foils for Europeans--and thus assume that American civilization was formed by Europeans in a struggle against the savagery or barbarism of the nonwhite races. This first conception implies the second--that the civilization so formed is unique. In the second conception uniqueness is thought to have been created through the forms and processes of civilization's struggle on a specifically American frontier. Alternatively, civilization was able to triumph because the people who bore it were unique from the beginning--a Chosen People or a super race. Either way American culture is seen as not only unique but better than all other cultures, precisely because of its differences from them.*
* "US exceptionalism weaves through much of the literature produced in the United States, not only the writing of historians. Although Wallace Stegner decried the devastation wrought by imperialism on Indigenous peoples and the land, he reinforced the idea of US uniqueness by reducing colonization to a twist of fate that produced some charming characteristics:
	> *Ever since Daniel Boone took his first excursion over Cumberland Gap, Americans have been wanderers...With a continent to take over and Manifest Destiny to goad us, we could not have avoided being footloose. The initial act of emigration from Europe, an act of extreme, deliberate disaffiliation, was the beginning of a national habit.*
	> *It should not be denied, either, that being footloose has always exhilarated us. It is associated in our minds with escape from history and oppression and law and irksome obligations, with absolute freedom, and the road has always led west. Our folk heroes and our archetypal literary figures accurately reflect that side of us. Leatherstocking, Huckleberry Finn, the narrator of Moby Dick, all are orphans and wanderers; any of them could say, 'Call me Ishmael'. The Lone Ranger has no dwelling place except the saddle.*
* "The British novelist and critic D. H. Lawrence, who lived in northern New Mexico for two years, conceptualized the US origin myth, invoking Cooper's frontiersman character Deerslayer: 'You have there the myth of the essential white America. All the other stuff, the love, the democracy, the floundering into lust, is a sort of by-play. **The essential American soul is hard, isolate, stoic, and a killer.** It has never yet melted'.
* "Historian Wai-chee Dimock points out that nonfiction sources of the time reflected the same view:
	> *The 'United States Magazine' and 'Democratic Review' summed it up by arguing that whereas European powers 'conquer only to enslave', America, being 'a free nation', 'conquers only to bestow freedom' ...Far from being antagonistic, 'empire' and 'liberty' are instrumentally conjoined. If the former stands to safeguard the latter, the latter, in turn, serves to justify the former. Indeed, the conjunction of the two, of freedom and dominion, gives America its sovereign place in history--its Manifest Destiny, as its advocates so aptly called it.*
* "Reconciling empire and liberty--based on the violent taking of Indigenous lands--into a usable myth allowed for the **emergence of an enduring populist imperialism**. Wars of conquest and ethnic cleansing could be sold to 'the people'--indeed could be fought for by the young men of those very people--by promising to expand economic opportunity, democracy, and freedom for all.
* "The publication arc of the 'Leatherstocking Tales' parallels the Jackson presidency. For those who consumed the books in that period and throughout the nineteenth century-generations of young white men--the novels became perceived fact, not fiction, and the basis for the coalescence of US American nationalism. 
* "Behind the legend was a looming real-life figure, the archetype that inspired the stories, namely, Daniel Boone, an icon of US settler colonialism. **Boone's life spanned from 1734 to 1820, precisely the period covered in the Leatherstocking series.** Boone was born in Berks County, Pennsylvania, on the edge of British settlement. 
* "Boone is an avatar of the moving colonial-Indigenous frontier. To the west lay 'Indian Country', claimed through the Doctrine of Discovery by both Britain and France but free of European settlers save for a few traders, trappers, and soldiers manning colonial outposts.
* "Daniel Boone died in 1820 in Missouri, a part of the vast territory acquired in the 1803 Louisiana Purchase. When Missouri opened for settlement, the Boone family led the initial settlers there. His body was taken for burial in Frankfort, Kentucky, the covenant heart of the Ohio Country, Indian Country, for which the revolution had been fought and in which he had been the trekker superhero, almost a deity. 
* "Daniel Boone became a celebrity at age fifty in 1784, a year after the end of the war of independence. Real estate entrepreneur John Filson, seeking settlers to buy property in the Ohio Country, wrote and self-published *The Discovery, Settlement and Present State of Kentucke*, along with a map to guide illegal squatters. 
* "The book contained an appendix about Daniel Boone, purportedly written by Boone himself. That part of the book on Boone's 'adventures' subsequently was published as 'The Adventures of Col. Daniel Boone' in the American Magazine in 1787, then as a book. Thereby a superstar was born--the mythical hero, the hunter, the 'Man Who Knows Indians', as Richard Slotkin has described this US American archetype:
	> *The myth of the hunter that had grown up about the figure of Filson's Daniel Boone provided a framework within which Americans attempted to define their cultural identity, social and political values, historical experience, and literary aspirations...Daniel Boone, Washington, Franklin, and Jefferson were heroes to the whole nation because their experiences had reference to many or all of these common experiences. 'The Hunters of Kentucky', a popular song that swept the nation in 1822-28, helped elect Andrew Jackson as President by associating him with Boone, the hero of the West.*
* "Yet the Leatherstocking's positive twist on genocidal colonialism was based on the reality of invasion, squatting, attacking, and colonizing of the Indigenous nations. Neither Filson nor Cooper created that reality. Rather, they created the narratives that captured the experience and imagination of the Anglo-American settler, **stories that were surely instrumental in nullifying guilt related to genocide and set the pattern of narrative for future US writers, poets, and historians.**

### Commander and Chief p.107

* "Andrew Jackson is enshrined in most US history texts in a chapter titled 'The Age of Jackson', 'The Age of Democracy', 'The Birth of Democracy', or some variation thereon. The Democratic Party claims Jackson and Jefferson as its founders. Every year, state and national Democratic organizations hold fund-raising events they call Jefferson-Jackson Dinners. They understand that Thomas Jefferson was the thinker and Jackson the doer in forging populist democracy for full participation in the fruits of colonialism based on the opportunity available to Anglo settlers.
* "Jackson carried out the original plan envisioned by the founders--particularly Jefferson--initially as a Georgia militia leader, then as an army general who led four wars of aggression against the Muskogees in Georgia and Florida, and finally as a president who engineered the expulsion of all Native peoples east of the Mississippi to the designated 'Indian Territory'. As the late Cherokee principal chief Wilma Mankiller wrote in her autobiography:
	> *The fledgling United States government's method of dealing with native people--a process which then included systematic genocide, property theft, and total subjugation--reached its nadir in 1830 under the federal policy of President Andrew Jackson. More than any other president, he used forcible removal to expel the eastern tribes from their land. From the very birth of the nation, the United States government truly had carried out a vigorous operation of extermination and removal. Decades before Jackson took office, during the administration of Thomas Jefferson, it was already cruelly apparent to many Native American leaders that any hope for tribal autonomy was cursed. So were any thoughts of peaceful coexistence with white citizens.
* "It's not that Jackson had a 'dark side' as his apologists rationalize and which all human beings have, but rather that Jackson was the Dark Knight in the formation of the United States as a colonialist, imperialist democracy, a dynamic formation that continues to constitute the core of US patriotism. 
* "**The most revered presidents--Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson, both Roosevelts, Truman, Kennedy, Reagan, Clinton, Obama--have each advanced populist imperialism while gradually increasing inclusion of other groups beyond the core of descendants of old settlers into the ruling mythology.** 
* "All the presidents after Jackson march in his footsteps. Consciously or not, they refer back to him on what is acceptable, **how to reconcile democracy and genocide and characterize it as freedom for the people**.
* "Jackson was a national military hero, but he was rooted in the Scots-Irish frontier communities, most of whose people--unlike him--remained impoverished. Their small farms were hard-pressed to compete with large plantations with thousands of acres of cotton planted and each tended by hundreds of enslaved Africans.
* "Land-poor white rural people saw Jackson as the man who would save them, making land available to them by ridding it of Indians, thereby setting the pattern of the dance between poor and rich US Americans ever since under the guise of equality of opportunity. 
* "When Jackson was inaugurated in 1829, he opened the White House to the public, the majority in attendance being humble poor whites. Jackson was easily reelected in 1832, although landless settlers had acquired very little land, and what little they seized was soon lost to speculators, transformed into ever larger plantations worked by slave labor.
* "The late Jackson biographer Michael Paul Ragin observed:
	> *Indian removal was Andrew Jackson's major policy aim in the quarter-century before he became President. His Indian wars and treaties were principally responsible for dispossessing the southern Indians during those years. His presidential Indian removal finished the job...During the years of 'Jacksonian Democracy'--1824-1852--five of the ten major candidates for President had either won reputations as generals in Indian wars or served as Secretary of War, whose major responsibility in this period was relations with the Indians. Historians, however, have failed to place Indians at the center of Jackson's life. **They have interpreted the Age of Jackson from every perspective but Indian destruction**, the one from which it actually developed historically.*
* "Once elected president, Jackson lost no time in initiating the removal of all the Indigenous farmers and the destruction of all their towns in the South. In his first annual message to Congress, he wrote: 'The emigration should be voluntary, for it would be as cruel as unjust to compel the aborigines to abandon the graves of their fathers and seek a home in a distant land. But they should be distinctly informed that if they remain within the limits of the States they must be subject to their laws. In return for their obedience as individuals they will without doubt be protected in the enjoyment of those possessions which they have improved by their industry.'
* "**This political code language barely veils the intention to forcibly remove the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Muskogee, and Seminole Nations, followed by all other Indigenous communities from east of the Mississippi River**, except for the many who could not be rounded up and remained, without land, without acknowledgment, until the successful struggles of some of them for recognition in the late twentieth century.
* "The state of Georgia saw Jackson's election as a green light and claimed most of the Cherokee Nation's territory as public land. The Georgia legislature resolved that the Cherokee constitution and laws were null and void and that Cherokees were subject to Georgia law. 
* "The Cherokee Nation took a case against Georgia to the US Supreme Court. With Chief Justice John Marshall writing for the majority, the Court ruled in favor of the Cherokees. **Jackson ignored the Supreme Court, however, in effect saying that John Marshall had made his decision and Marshall would have to enforce it if he could, although he, Jackson, had an army while Marshall did not.**
* "While the case was working its way through the courts, gold was discovered in Georgia in 1829, which quickly brought some **forty thousand eager gold seekers to run roughshod over Cherokee lands, squatting, looting, killing, and destroying fields and game parks**. Under authority granted by the Indian Removal Act, passed by Congress in 1830, the United States drew up a treaty that would cede all Cherokee lands to the government in exchange for land in 'Indian Territory'. 
* "The US government held Cherokee leaders in jail and closed their printing press during negotiations with a few handpicked Cherokees, who provided the bogus signatures Jackson needed as a cover for forced removal.

### Trails of Tears p.110

* "Not only the great southern nations were driven into exile, but also nearly all the Native nations east of the Mississippi were forced off their lands and relocated to Indian Territory, seventy thousand people in all.
* "During the Jacksonian period, the United States made eighty-six treaties with twenty-six Indigenous nations between New York and the Mississippi, all of them forcing land sessions, including removals. Some communities fled to Canada and Mexico rather than going to Indian Territory. 
* "When Sauk leader Black Hawk led his people back from a winter stay in Iowa to their homeland in Illinois in 1832 to plant corn, the squatter settlers there claimed they were being invaded, bringing in both Illinois militia and federal troops. **The 'Black Hawk War' that is narrated in history texts was no more than a slaughter of Sauk farmers. The Sauks tried to defend themselves but were starving when Black Hawk surrendered under a white flag. Still the soldiers fired, resulting in a bloodbath.** In his surrender speech, Black Hawk spoke bitterly of the enemy:
	> *You know the cause of our making war. It is known to all white men. They ought to be ashamed of it. Indians are not deceitful. The white men speak bad of the Indian and look at him spitefully. But the Indian does not tell lies. Indians do not steal. An Indian who is as bad as the white men could not live in our nation; he would be put to death and eaten up by the wolves...We told them to leave us alone, and keep away from us; they followed on, and beset our paths, and they coiled themselves among us, like the snake. They poisoned us by their touch. We were not safe. We lived in danger.*
* "The Sauks were rounded up and driven onto a reservation called Sac and Fox.
* "Most Cherokees had held out in remaining in their homeland despite pressure from federal administrations from Jefferson on to migrate voluntarily to the Arkansas-Oklahoma-Missouri area of the Louisiana Purchase territory. The Cherokee Nation addressed removal:
	> *We are aware that some persons suppose it will be for our advantage to remove beyond the Mississippi. We think otherwise. Our people universally think otherwise...We wish to remain on the land of our fathers. We have a perfect and original right to remain without interruption or molestation. The treaties with us, and laws of the United States made in pursuance of treaties, guarantee our residence and our privileges, and secure us against intruders. Our only request is, that these treaties may be fulfilled, and these laws executed.*
* "A few contingents of Cherokees settled in Arkansas and what became Indian Territory as early as 1817. There was a larger migration in 1832, which came after the Indian Removal Act. The 1838 forced march of the Cherokee Nation--now known as the **Trail of Tears**--was an arduous journey from remaining Cherokee homelands in Georgia and Alabama to what would later become northeastern Oklahoma. After the Civil War, journalist James Mooney interviewed people who had been involved in the forced removal. Based on these firsthand accounts, he described the scene in 1838, when the US Army removed the last of the Cherokees by force:
	> *Under [General Winfield] Scott's orders the troops were disposed at various points throughout the Cherokee country, where stockade forts were erected for gathering in and holding the Indians preparatory to removal. From these, squads of troops were sent to search out with rifle and bayonet every small cabin hidden away in the coves or by sides of mountain streams, to seize and bring in as prisoners all the occupants, however or wherever they might be found. Families at dinner were startled by the sudden gleam of bayonets in the doorway and rose up to be driven with blows and oaths along the weary miles of trail that led to the stockade. Men were seized in their fields or going along the road, women were taken from their wheels and children from their play. In many cases, on turning for one last look as they crossed the ridge, they saw their homes in flames, fired by the lawless rabble that followed on the heels of the soldiers to loot and pillage. So keen were these outlaws on the scene that in some instances they were driving off the cattle and other stock of the Indians almost before the soldiers had fairly started their owners in the other direction. Systematic hunts were made by the same men for Indian graves, to rob them of the silver pendants and other valuables deposited with the dead. A Georgia volunteer, afterward a colonel in the Confederate service, said: **'I fought through the Civil War and have seen men shot to pieces and slaughtered by thousands, but the Cherokee removal was the cruelest work I ever knew.'***
* "**Half of the sixteen thousand Cherokee men, women, and children who were rounded up and force-marched in the dead of winter out of their country perished on the journey.**
* "The Muskogees and Seminoles suffered similar death rates in their forced transfer, while the Chickasaws and Choctaws lost around 15 percent of their people en route. An eyewitness account by Alexis de Tocqueville, the French observer of the day, captures one of thousands of similar scenes in the forced deportation of the Indigenous peoples from the Southeast:
	> *I saw with my own eyes several of the cases of misery which I have been describing; and I was the witness of sufferings which I have not the power to portray.*
	>
	> *At the end of the year 1831, whilst I was on the left bank of the Mississippi at a place named by Europeans Memphis, there arrived a numerous band of Choctaws (or Chactas, as they are called by the French in Louisiana). These savages had left their country, and were endeavoring to gain the right bank of the Mississippi, where they hoped to find an asylum which had been promised them by the American government.* 
	>
	> *It was then the middle of winter, and the cold was unusually severe; the snow had frozen hard upon the ground, and the river was drifting huge masses of ice. The Indians had their families with them; and they brought in their train the wounded and sick, with children newly born, and old men upon the verge of death. They possessed neither tents nor wagons, but only their arms and some provisions. I saw them embark to pass the mighty river, and never will that solemn spectacle fade from my remembrance.* 
	>
	> *No cry, no sob was heard amongst the assembled crowd; all were silent. Their calamities were of ancient date, and they knew them to be irremediable. The Indians had all stepped into the bark which was to carry them across, but their dogs remained upon the bank. As soon as these animals perceived that their masters were finally leaving the shore, they set up a dismal howl, and, plunging all together into the icy waters of the Mississippi, they swam after the boat.*
* "Against all odds, some Indigenous peoples refused to be removed and stayed in their traditional homelands east of the Mississippi. In the South, the communities that did not leave lost their traditional land titles and status as Indians in the eyes of the government, but many survived as peoples, some fighting successfully in the late twentieth century for federal acknowledgment and official Indigenous status. 
* "In the north, especially in New England, some states had illegally taken land and created guardian systems and small reservations, such as those of the Penobscots and Passamaquoddies in Maine, both of which won lawsuits against the states and attained federal acknowledgment during the militant movements of the 1970s. Many other Native nations have been able to increase their land bases.

### The Persistence of Denial p.114 

* "Andrew Jackson was born to squatters under British rule on Indigenous land. His life followed the trajectory of continental imperialism as he made his career of taking Indigenous land, from the time of Jefferson's presidency to the elimination of Indigenous nations east of the Mississippi. 
* "This process was the central fact of US politics and the basis for the US economy. **Two-thirds of the US population of nearly four million at the time of independence lived within fifty miles of the Atlantic Ocean.** 
* "**During the following half century, more than four million settlers crossed the Appalachians--one of the largest and most rapid migrations in world history.** Jackson was an actor who made possible the implementation of the imperialist project of the independent United States, but he was also an exponent of the **Euro-American popular will that favored imperialism and the virtually free land it provided them**.
* "During the period of Jackson's military and executive power, a mythology emerged that defined the contours and substance of the US origin narrative, which has weathered nearly two centuries and remains intact in the early twenty-first century as patriotic cant, a civic religion invoked in [Barack Obama's first presidential inaugural address in January 2009](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2009/01/21/president-Barack-obamas-inaugural-address):
	>
	> *In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is never a given. It must be earned. Our journey has never been one of shortcuts or settling for less.*
	>
	> *It has not been the path for the faint-hearted, for those who prefer leisure over work, or seek only the pleasures of riches and fame.*
	>
	> *Rather, it has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers of things--some celebrated, but more often men and women obscure in their labor--who have carried us up the long, rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.*
	>
	> *For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions and traveled across oceans in search of a new life. For us, they toiled in sweatshops and settled the West, endured the lash of the whip and plowed the hard earth.*
	>
	> *For us, they fought and died in places like Concord and Gettysburg; Normandy and **Khe Sanh**.* [The fact that Obama cites the [1968 Battle of Khe Sanh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Khe_Sanh) from the Vietnam War shows how pro-imperialist he is willing to be.]
	>
	> *Time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked till their hands were raw so that we might live a better life. They saw America as bigger than the sum of our individual ambitions; greater than all the differences of birth or wealth or faction.*
	>
	> *This is the journey we continue today.*
* "Spoken like a true descendant of old settlers. President Obama raised another key element of the national myth in an interview a few days later with Al Arabiya television in Dubai. Affirming that the United States could be an honest broker in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, he said: 'We sometimes make mistakes. We have not been perfect. **But if you look at the track record, as you say, America was not born as a colonial power**'.
* "The affirmation of democracy requires the denial of colonialism, but denying it does not make it go away."

-----------------------------------

## Chapter 7: Sea to Shining Sea p.117



> *These Spaniards* [Mexicans] *are the meanest looking race of people I ever saw, don't appear more civilized than our Indians generally. Dirty, filthy looking creatures.*
>
> --Captain Lemuel Ford, 1835


> *That the Indian race of Mexico must recede before us, is quite as certain as that that is the destiny of our own Indians.
>
> --Waddy Thompson Jr., 1836


* "Captain Lemuel Ford of the First Dragoons, United States Army, made the above observation in his diary, referring to Comancheros--Mexican traders in northern Mexico who traded and intermarried primarily with Comanches on the plains. 
* "Waddy Thompson Jr. served as a US diplomat to Mexico from 1842 to 1844. Army officers like Ford and diplomats like Thompson were not exceptional in their racist views. Indian hating and white supremacy were part and parcel of 'democracy' and 'freedom'.
* "The populist poet of Jacksonian democracy, **Walt Whitman, sang the song of manhood and the Anglo-American super race that had been steeled through empire**. 
* "As an enthusiastic supporter of the US war against Mexico in 1846, Whitman proposed the stationing of sixty thousand US troops in Mexico in order to establish a regime change there 'whose efficiency and permanency shall be guaranteed by the United States. This will bring out enterprise, open the way for manufacturers and commerce, into which the immense dead capital of the country [Mexico] will find its way.'
* "**Whitman explicitly grounded this prescription in racism: 'The n-gger, like the Injun, will be eliminated; it is the law of the races, history...A superior grade of rats come and then all the minor rats are cleared out'**. 
* "The whole world would benefit from US expansion: 'We pant to see our country and its rule far-reaching. What has miserable, inefficient Mexico...to do with the great mission of peopling the New World with a noble race?'
* "In September 1846, when General Zachary Taylor's troops captured Monterrey, Whitman hailed it as 'another clinching proof of the indomitable energy of the Anglo-Saxon character'. Whitman's sentiments reflected the established US origin myth that had the frontier settlers replacing the Native peoples as historical destiny, adding his own theoretical twist of what would later be called Social Darwinism."

### US Overseas Imperialism p.118

* "Traversing the continent 'from sea to shining sea' was hardly a natural westward procession of covered wagons as portrayed in Western movies. 
* "The US invasion of Mexico was carried out by US marines, by sea, through Veracruz; the early colonization of California initially progressed from the Pacific coast, reached from the Atlantic coast by way of Tierra del Fuego. 
* **"Between the Mississippi River and the Rockies lay a vast region controlled by Indigenous nations that were neither conquered nor colonized by any European power.** Although the United States managed to annex northern Mexico, **large numbers of settlers could not reach the Northern California goldfields or the fertile Willamette Valley region of the Pacific Northwest without army regiments accompanying them**. 
* "Why then does the popular US historical narrative of a 'natural' westward movement persist? The answer is that those who still hold to the narrative **remain captives of the ideology of 'manifest destiny'**--according to which the United States expanded across the continent to assume its preordained size and shape. **This ideology normalizes the successive invasions and occupations of Indigenous nations and Mexico as not being colonialist or imperialist, rather simply ordained progress.** 
* "In this view, Mexico was just another Indian nation to be crushed.
* "**The US invasion of Mexico has also been characterized as the first US 'foreign' war, but it was not. By 1846, the United States had invaded, occupied, and ethnically cleansed dozens of foreign nations east of the Mississippi.** 
* "Then there were the Barbary Wars. The opening lyric of the official hymn of the US Marine Corps, composed and adopted soon after the invasion of Mexico, 'From the Halls of Montezuma to the shores of Tripoli' refers in part to 1801-5, when the marines were dispatched by President Thomas Jefferson to invade the Berber Nation of North Africa. 
* "This was the 'First Barbary War'--the ostensible goal of which was to persuade Tripoli to release US sailors it held hostage and to end 'pirate' attacks on US merchant ships. The 'Second Barbary War' in 1815-16, ended when pasha Yusuf Karamanli--ruler of Tripoli--agreed not to exact fees from US ships entering their territorial waters.
* "By this time, throughout Spain's American colonies, wars of independence flamed, the *leaders of these revolutions inspired by the French Revolution and the Haitian Revolution*. 
* "A successful independence movement arose in France's Caribbean plantation slave colony of Haiti in 1801, when the majority enslaved African population overthrew the French planters and declared an independent nation-state. **[The Haitian Revolution] the first permanently successful national liberation movement against European colonialism in the world.** 
* "**The prevailing myth claims that the colonized peoples fighting for independence from Spain were inspired by successful US secession from Britain but this is a dubious claim.**
* "Simon Bolívar was a major leader of the independence move­ ments in South America. He visited liberated Haiti in 1815, a trip that sharpened his hatred for slavery and led to its abolishment in the independent nations that formed in South America. 
* "Bolívar and liberator José de San Martín were founders of the unitary republic they named Gran Colombia, which survived from 1819 to 1830 with Bolívar as president. Subsequently, Gran Colombia splintered into the nation-states of Venezuela, Colombia (which then included Panama), Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. 
* "A similar unitary nation formed in Central America called the United Provinces of Central America, with its capital in Guatemala City, which existed from 1821 to 1841, thereafter splitting into the present separate small states. In both cases the larger and stronger unitary federations were subject to economic intervention and domination by the British and US empires.
* "Father Miguel Hidalgo, a priest who was instrumental in the Mexican independence movement, was deeply assimilated into Indigenous society in Mexico, and the majority of the movement's insurgent fighters were drawn from Indigenous nations. 
* "Most of the actual fighters in the independence movements led by San Martín and Bolívar in South America were also Indigenous, representing their communities and nations, fighting for their own liberation as peoples. **In striking contrast, the US war of independence targeted the Indigenous nations as enemies.**
* "The Indigenous communities in the new South American republics were soon dominated economically and politically by national landed elites that consolidated their power following the wars of independence. **However, Indigenous peoples whose ancestors fought for liberation from Spanish colonialism have never forgotten their important role in those revolutionary movements and realize that the liberation process continues.**
* "**The Indigenous peoples of Latin America feel they own those revolutions, whereas the US secession from Great Britain was the intentional founding of a *white republic* that planned elimination of the Indigenous peoples as territorial-based, collective societies**.
* "The period of US intervention to annex and dominate former Spanish territories in the Americas began not in 1898 with the Spanish-American War, as most history texts claim, but rather nearly a century before, during Jefferson's presidency, with the Zebulon M. Pike expedition of 1806-7. 
* "**Those historians who track 'continental expansion' separately from clear actions of US imperialism rarely note the juxtaposition in time and presidential administration of the interventions in North Africa and Mexico on the eve of its liberation from Spain**. 
* "Like the Lewis and Clark expedition--completed the same year that Pike set off--the Pike expedition was a military project ordered by President Jefferson. Lewis and Clark had headed into the far reaches of the newly acquired Louisiana Territory to gather intelligence on the Mandan, Hidatsa, Paiute, Shoshone, Ute, and many other nations in the huge swath of territory between the Rockies and the Pacific, bordered by Spanish-occupied territory on the west and south and British Canada on the north. 
* "*Pike and his small force of soldiers and Osage hostages had orders to illegally enter Spanish territory to gather information that would later be used for military invasion.* Under the guise of having gone astray, Pike and his contingent found themselves inside Spanish-occupied northern New Mexico--today's southern Colorado--where they 'discovered' Pikes Peak and built a fort. 
* "Ultimately, as they had undoubtedly planned, they were taken into custody by Spanish authorities who transported them to Chihuahua, Mexico, allowing Pike and his men to observe and make notes about northern Mexico on the way. **More important, they collected information on Spanish military resources and behavior and the location of and relations among civilian populations.** Pike was released, and in 1810 published his findings. Later titled *The Expeditions of Zebulon Montgomery Pike*, the book was a best seller. 

### US Colonization of Northern Mexico p.121

* "The instability of the impoverished new republic of Mexico, as it emerged in 1821 from more than three centuries of Spanish colonialism and an exhausting war of national liberation, put it in a weak position to defend its territory against US aggression. 
* "With Spain out of the way, the United States could pursue its own policy of imperialism without risking a difficult war with European imperialist powers--what George Washington had referred to in his farewell address when he warned against 'foreign entanglements'. 
* "Once Mexico was independent, **its newly formed government immediately opened its borders to trade, something Spanish authorities had never allowed.** US trader William Becknell arrived at Taos in the Mexican province of Nuevo Mexico from St. Louis in 1821, and a US trading party led by Sylvester Pattie arrived in 1824. 
* "Traders based in St. Louis, at the time the effective western frontier outpost of the United States, began extending their business to New Mexico. Until the publication of Pike's book in 1810, US merchants had shown little interest in trading in Mexico. Pike's account of the potential profits to be made inspired them to set out to capture that trade.
* "US traders would help pave the way to US political control of northern Mexico through what came to be known as the 'American party of Taos' Christopher Houston 'Kit' Carson would play a major role in the success of the US invasion of northern Mexico as he continued work as a colonial mercenary. 
* "Born in 1809 in Kentucky, **Carson was a fur trapper and entrepreneur, as well as a noted Indian hater and killer**, who had left his family's homestead in Missouri for New Mexico at age sixteen. Most of the US citizens who made up the American party, including Carson, **married into wealthy Spanish-identified families in New Mexico who had not favored independence from Spain, creating a strong Anglo affinity within the local ruling class**. The goal of this clique was to attract, and thus monopolize, the trade in furs with Indigenous and other trappers, with the ultimate goal of US annexation. 
* "As a magnet, the traders would offer low-priced manufactured goods, from clothing to kitchenware, tools, and furniture. **St. Louis** was connected to transatlantic trading houses in cities on the East Coast, so it had the advantage of better variety and quality of goods than those of Chihuahua traders, who relied on the declining port of Veracruz. 
* "Bent's Fort (near present-day La Junta, Colorado) became the economic center for the fur trade in northern New Mexico, rivaling only John Jacob Astor's American Fur Company in North America. Missouri merchants circumvented the Mexican prohibition against exports of silver and gold--lifted briefly for silver between 1828 and 1835--through smuggling and bribery.
* "**St. Louis soon replaced Chihuahua as the entrêpot for the northern Mexico trade, and the elite of Mexico's northern provinces became parties to the US objective of incorporating the territory into the United States**. As early as 1824, Missouri senator Thomas Hart Benton introduced a bill in the US Senate on behalf of citizens of Missouri for a US government survey of the Santa Fe Trail to the Mexican border. 
* "In 1832, President Andrew Jackson began using US troops to protect caravans of merchandise on the Santa Fe Trail going to northern Mexico from possible interference by Indigenous peoples whose territories they crossed without permission.
* "In addition to New Mexico, US citizen residents laid groundwork for the annexation of Mexico in Texas and California as well. The Spanish *Cortes* (parliament) had enacted a law in 1813 that authorized provincial authorities to make private property land grants, and this practice of granting land to individuals, including foreigners, was continued under the independent Mexican government until 1828. 
* "In 1823, Mexico's despotic ruler Agustín de Iturbide enacted a colonization law authorizing the national government to enter into a contract granting land to an *empresario*, or promoter, who was required to recruit a minimum of two hundred families to settle the grant. 
* "Only applied in the province of Texas, *many such grants were sought by and granted to slave-owning Anglo-American entrepreneurs, **despite slavery being illegal in Mexico**, making possible their dominance in the province and leading to Mexico's loss of Texas in 1836*.
* "Senator Benton, his son-in-law Captain John C. Frémont, and Kit Carson also helped pave the way for the **invasion of Northern California**. In the early 1840s, Benton and his daughter, Jessie--Frémont's wife--built a booster press to entice settlers to the Oregon Territory as well as to settle in the Mexican province of California. 
* "At the same time, Frémont and his guide Carson mounted five expeditions to gather information, laying the groundwork for military conquest. **The third expedition illegally entered the Sacramento Valley region from the north in early 1846, just before the United States declared war against Mexico.** Frémont encouraged Anglo settlers in the Central Valley to side with the United States, promising military protection if war broke out. Once a US warship was positioned for war, Frémont was appointed lieutenant colonel of the California Battalion, as if it had all been planned in advance.
* "Exploration and intelligence gathered by Pike, followed by infiltration and settlement of northern Mexican provinces preceded by US entrepreneurs, finally culminated in military invasion and war. US forces fought their way from Mexico's main commercial port of Veracruz on the Gulf of Mexico to the capital, Mexico City, nearly three hundred miles away. 
* "The US Army occupied the capital until the Mexican government agreed to cede its northern territories--codified in *the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo*. 
	* *Texas* had become a US state at the end of 1845. 
	* *California* quickly acquired statehood in 1850. 
	* *Nevada* in 1864
	* *Colorado* in 1876
	* *Wyoming* in 1890
	* *Utah* in 1896
	* But the more densely populated *Arizona* and *New Mexico* not until 1912.
* "The Land Ordinance of 1815 had established a national system for surveying and distributing land, and as one historian has noted, **'Under the May 1785 ordinance, Indian land would be auctioned off to the highest bidder'.** 
* "The Northwest Ordinance of 1787, albeit guaranteeing Indigenous occupancy and title, **set forth an evolutionary colonization procedure for annexation via military occupation, territorial status, and finally statehood**. 
* "**Conditions for statehood would be achieved when the settlers outnumbered the Indigenous population, which in the cases of both the Mexican cession area and the Louisiana Purchase territory required decimation or forced removal of Indigenous populations.** 
* "In this US system, *unique among colonial powers, land became the most important exchange commodity for the accumulation of capital and building of the national treasury.* **To understand the genocidal policy of the US government, the centrality of land sales in building the economic base of the US wealth and power must be seen.** 
* "Apologists for US expansionism see the 1787 ordinance not as a reflection of colonialism, but rather as a means of 'reconciling the problem of liberty with the problem of empire' in historian Howard Lamar's words.
* "Following the Mexican War, the United States faced problems more pressing than that of reconciling conflicting ideologies. For one thing, the vast majority in the annexed territory were Indigenous peoples or Mexican farmers and ranchers--landed communities.
* "**As for the Navajos, Apaches, and Utes who had resisted for centuries all colonization efforts by the Spanish and then the Mexican authorities, they continued to resist the new colonial regime.**
* "To understand how the peoples of these regions responded to the US invasion and conquest, and to understand their particular relationship with the United States today, it is essential to understand their history under Spanish colonization."

### Indigenous Peoples of Occupied Northern Mexico p.125

* "Although the Spanish Crown had dispatched explorers such as Coronado, Cabeza de Baca, and others, and had established trading and military posts and towns along the North American Atlantic Coast and in Florida and along the Gulf Coast as far as the Mississippi, **Spanish settler-colonialist rule did not begin north of the Rio Grande until 1598**. 
* "The soldier-settler colonizing mission launched a brutal military assault on the Pueblo towns in New Mexico and imposed state and church institutions. **The colonizers found a thriving irrigation-based agriculture supporting a population living in 98 interrelated city-states (*pueblos*, the Spanish called them), and within two decades they reduced the towns to 21.
* "Perhaps **most provocative--given the Pueblos' extensive rituals and numerous religious feast days--the Franciscan missionaries forbade Pueblo religious practices and forced Christianity upon them**. As Spanish repression and labor exploitation intensified, the Pueblos organized a revolution that also was supported by the unconquered Navajos, Apaches, and Utes, and the Hopi towns to the west in what is now Arizona. 
* "They were joined by the servant and laboring class of captive Indigenous and Mestizos in the Spanish capital at Santa Fe. **In 1680, they drove the Spanish out of New Mexico, leaving the Pueblos free for twelve years before a new and permanent colonizing mission arrived**.
* "During another 130 years of Spanish rule before Mexico's independence, the Pueblos were strictly controlled and forced to provide foot soldiers for Spanish forays against the Navajos, Apaches, and Utes who were never colonized by the Spanish. 
* "Mexico ousted the Franciscans and left the Pueblos to their own lives, although much of their territory had been lost to permanent settlers.
* "The two largest Mexican provinces annexed by the United States, Coahuila y Tejas (Texas) and California, were more sparsely populated and not as tightly centralized and organized as New Mexico. 
* "After 1692, as the Spanish Crown sent an army to invade and reoccupy the Rio Grande Pueblos, it also sought effective control and settlement of California and Texas, in part to create a large buffer with competing French, British, and Russian imperialism. 
* "After two centuries of dominance in the Americas, the Spanish state was crumbling politically and economically. Having experienced a depression in silver production in their American colonies and growing competition from other European powers, **the Spanish settled on maintaining and expanding its northern holdings to hold back French and British encroachment into the mining areas of the interior of New Spain (Mexico)**.
* "In what is now the state of Texas, Spain built forts and expropriated land from the local Indigenous people, granting it to Spanish settlers to farm and ranch. The first Spanish town in Texas, San Antonio, was established in 1718, and Franciscan missionaries founded the Mission San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo). 
* "Spanish forts, missions, and settlements dotted the territory, especially along the Rio Grande from Matamoras to Laredo. The Indigenous peoples of Texas included the Lupin Apaches, Jumanos, Coahuiltecans, Tonkawas, Karankawas, and Caddos, all of whom were more vulnerable to colonization than the more mobile Comanches and Wichitas in West Texas. 
* "By the time of Mexican independence, the Indigenous population of the province was around fifty thousand, while Spanish settlers numbered around thirty thousand.
* "**During the first decade of Mexican independence, some ten thousand Cherokees, Seminoles, Shawnees, and many other Indigenous communities east of the Mississippi avoided forced removal to Indian Territory and escaped the iron heel of the United States, taking refuge in Mexico.** 
* "One such community was the people of the Coahuila Kikapu (Kickapoo) Nation, forced out of its homeland when Wisconsin was opened for settlement. 
* "The Tohono O'odam Nation did not move anywhere, but the redrawn 1848 border split their homeland. The independent Republic of Mexico provided land grants for their various communities. With Texas's independence from Mexico, then US annexation, many moved south of the imposed new border.
* "**The Republic of Mexico opened a door to US domination by granting land to Anglo immigrants.** During the first decade of Mexican independence, some thirty thousand Anglo-American farmers and plantation owners, along with their slaves, poured into Texas, receiving development land grants. 
* "By the time Texas became a US state in 1845, Anglo settlers numbered 160,000. Mexico abolished slavery in 1829, which affected the Anglo-American settlers' quest for wealth in building plantations worked by enslaved Africans. 
* "They lobbied the Mexican government for a reversal of the ban and gained only a one-year extension to settle their affairs and free their bonded workers-the government refused to legalize slavery. The settlers decided to secede from Mexico, initiating the famous and mythologized 1836 Battle of the Alamo, where the mercenaries James Bowie and Davy Crockett and slave owner William Travis were killed. 
* "Although technically an Anglo-American loss, the siege of the Alamo served to stir Anglo patriotic passions, and within a month at the decisive Battle of San Jacinto, Mexico handed over the province. This was a great victory for the Andrew Jackson administration, for Jackson's brother, Mason, who was one of the Texas planters, and especially for the alcoholic settler-warrior hero Sam Houston.
* The former governor of Tennessee, Houston was made commander in chief of the Texas army and president of the new 'Texas republic', which he helped guide to US statehood in 1845. **One of the first acts of the pro-slavery independent government was to establish a counterinsurgency force that-as its name, the Texas Rangers, suggests-followed the 'American way of war' in destroying Indigenous towns, eliminating Native nations in Texas, pursuing ethnic cleansing, and suppressing protest from Tejanos, former Mexican citizens**.

### Indigenous Resistance to Juniperra Serra and the Missions. p.127

* "Mission San Francisco de Asis, also called Mission Dolores, was a Spanish Franciscan mission established on the Pacific Coast at the same time as the Presidio (military base) at San Francisco--1776, the year that Anglo-Americans declared independence from Britain. 
* "The purpose of the garrison was twofold: to protect the mission from Indigenous inhabitants whose territory the Spanish were usurping and to round up those same people and force them to live and work for the Franciscan friars at the mission. 
* "Mission Dolores was the sixth of the twenty-one Franciscan missions established between 1769 and 1823, when Mexico disbanded the missions. The establishment of the missions and presidios from San Diego and Los Angeles and Santa Barbara to Carmel, San Francisco, and Sonoma, traces the colonization of California's Indigenous nations. **The five-hundred-mile road that connected the missions was called El Camino Real, the Royal Highway.**
* "The Spanish military in California was divided into four districts, each with Franciscan missions and strategically located presidios. The 1769 establishment of the first presidio in San Diego coincided with establishment of the first Franciscan mission in California. 
* "The second presidio was based in Monterey in 1770, to defend the six missions in the area as well as the mercury mines in the Santa Cruz Mountains. Monterey became the capital and the only port of entry for shipments to and from Spanish California, and it remained so until 1846, when the United States seized California.
* "**These California Franciscan missions and their founder, Junipero Serra, are extravagantly romanticized by modern California residents and remain popular tourist sites. Very few visitors notice, however, that in the middle of the plaza of each mission is a whipping post*.** 
* "The history symbolized by that artifact is not dead and buried with the generations of Indigenous bodies buried under the California crust. **The scars and trauma have been passed on from generation to generation. Putting salt in the wound, as it were, Pope John Paul II in 1988 beatified Junipero Serra, the first step toward sainthood.** 
* "California Indigenous peoples were insulted by this act and organized to prevent the sanctification of a person they consider to have been an exponent of rape, torture, death, starvation, and humiliation of their ancestors and the attempted destruction of their cultures. Serra would take soldiers with him, randomly kidnapping Indigenous individuals and families, recording these captures in his diaries, as in this instance:
	> *[When] one fled from between their [the soldiers'] hands, they caught the other. They tied him, and it was all necessary, for, even bound, he defended himself that they should not bring him, and flung himself on the ground with such violence that he scraped and bruised his thighs and knees. But at last they brought him...He was most frightened and very disturbed.*
* "In 1878, a old Kamia man named Janitin told an interviewer of his experience as a child:
	> *When we arrived at the mission, they locked me in a room for a week...Every day they lashed me unjustly because I did not finish what I did not know how to do, and thus I existed for many days until I found a way to escape; but I was tracked and they caught me like a fox.*
* "He was fastened to the stage and beaten to unconsciousness.
* "**California Indigenous peoples resisted this totalitarian order.** These insurgent actions are also recorded in official records and diaries, but they seem to have **interested few historians until the civil rights era of the 1950s and 1960s, when California Indigenous peoples began to do their own research.** They found that no mission escaped uprising from within or attacks from outside by communities of the imprisoned along with escapees. Guerrilla forces of up to two thousand formed. **Without this resistance, there would be no descendants of the California Native peoples of the area colonized by the Spanish.**"
* "**Under the protection of the US Army**, beginning in 1848, **gold seekers from all over the world brought death, torture, rape, starvation, and disease to the Indigenous peoples** whose ancestral territories included the sought-after goldfields north and east of San Francisco. As Alejandro Murguia describes it, unlike the Native peoples for whom gold was irrelevant, the forty-niners 'hungered for gold with a sickness':
	> *They would do anything for it. They left families, homes, everything behind; they sailed for eight months aboard leaky, smelly ships to reach California; others, captains and sailors, jumped ship at San Francisco, leaving a fleet of abandoned brigs, barks, and schooners to rot by the piers. **They slaughtered all the game they could find and so muddied the rivers and creeks with silt that the once plentiful salmon couldn't survive. The herds of elk and deer, the food source for Native Americans, were practically wiped out in one summer**. The miners cheated and killed each other in the goldfields.*
* "In a true reign of terror, **US occupation and settlement exterminated more than one hundred thousand California Native people in twenty-five years, reducing the population to thirty thousand by 1870--quite possibly the most extreme demographic disaster of all time**. 
* Here too--against impossible odds--the Indigenous resisted and survived to tell the story. **Had they not done so, there would be no Indigenous peoples remaining in Northern California, because the objective was to eradicate them.** From the onset of the California gold rush, *crazed 'gold bugs' invaded Indigenous territories, terrorizing and brutally killing those who were in their path*. 
* "These settlers seemed to require no military assistance in *running roughshod over unarmed Indigenous residents of fishing communities in a bountiful paradise of woods, rivers, and mountains*. **The role left for the US Army was to round up the starving Indigenous refugees to transport them to established reservations in Oregon and Oklahoma**."

### The White Man's Burden p.130

* "The two-year invasion and occupation of Mexico was a joyful experience for most US citizens, as evidenced by Walt Whitman's populist poetry. Its popularity was possible because of buoyant nationalism, and the war itself accelerated the spirit of nationalism and confirmed the manifest destiny of the United States. 
* "Besides new weapons of war and productive capacity brought about by the emerging industrial revolution, there was also an advance in printing and publishing techniques, which **increased the book publishing market from $2.5 million in 1830 to $12.5 million in 1850**.
* *Most of the books published during the five-year period leading up to, during, and after the invasion were war-mongering tracts.*
* Euro-American settlers were nearly all literate, and this was the period of the foundational 'American literature', with writers James Fenimore Cooper, Walt Whitman, Edgar Allan Poe, John Greenleaf Whittier, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, James Russell Lowell, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Herman Melville all active. **Each of them remains read, revered, and studied in the twenty-first century--as national and nationalist writers--not as colonialists.**
* "Although some of the writers, like Melville and Longfellow, paid little attention to the war, most of the others either fiercely supported it or opposed it. **Whitman, a supporter, was also enamored of the violent Indian- and Mexican-killing Texas Rangers**. Whitman saw the war as bolstering US self-respect and believed that a 'true American' would be unable to resist 'this pride in our victorious armies'. 
* "Emerson opposed the war as he did all wars. His opposition to the Mexican War was based, however, not just on his pacifism but also on his belief that the Mexican 'race' would poison Anglo-Americans through contact, the 'heart of darkness' fear. **Emerson supported territorial expansion at any cost but would have preferred it take place without war.**
* "Most of the writers of the era were obsessed with heroism. **Opposition to the Mexican War came from writers who were active abolitionists such as Thoreau, Whittier, and Lowell**. They believed the war was a plot of southern slave owners to extend slavery, punishing Mexico for having outlawed slavery when it became independent from Spain. 
* "However, **even the abolitionists believed in the 'manifest destiny of the English race'**--as Lowell put it in 1859--**'to occupy this whole continent and to display there that practical understand­ing in matters of government and colonization which no other race has given such proof of possessing since the Romans.'**
* "President James K. Polk--who presided over the war--saw its significance as an example of how a democracy could carry on and win a foreign war with as much 'vigor' as authoritarian governments were able to do. Polk believed that an elected civilian government with its volunteer people's army was even more effective than European monarchies in the quest for empire. 
* "The victory over Mexico proved to the European powers, he felt, that the United States was their equal. **Standing tall through military victory over a weak country--it was not Ronald Reagan or George W. Bush who thought up that idea.** The tradition is as old as the United States itself.
* "The US war against Mexico did more than annex half of Mexico. A debate that turned deadly ensued over whether the acquired territory would allow slaver; it brought on a civil war that produced a million casualties. The US Civil War allowed for the reorganization and modernization of the military and **streamlined counterinsurgency operations--that is, ones targeting civilians**. 
* "A rehearsal for this streamlining is found in the aftermath of the Mexican War in the **US Army counterinsurgency against the fierce resistance of the Apaches** in the portions of the territory annexed from Mexico in 1848 that later became the states of New Mexico and Arizona, as well as across the new border into what remained Mexico. 
* "The First and Second US Army Dragoons (cavalry troops) were employed for this purpose. These cavalry troops were elite, mounted, well-equipped, and trained for the desert terrain. 
* "During the period between the Mexican War and the Civil War, Indigenous resistance was led by *Gila Apache* leader Mangas Coloradas to maintain the Apaches' traditional lands and way of life. **The dragoons employed the 'first way of war'--total war--encouraging field units to attack Apache villages and destroy crops and kill livestock, slaughtering women and children and old men left in the villages** while the young men were engaged elsewhere fighting the dragoons.
* "This kind of warfare against Indigenous peoples continued throughout the Civil War and ratcheted up in the northern plains and Southwest afterward, producing the term that the US military use to this day all over the world when referring to enemy territory: 'Indian Country'." p.132

-------

## Chapter 8: "Indian Country" p.133

* "The US Army on the eve of the Civil War was divided into seven departments--a structure designed by John C. Calhoun during the Monroe administration. By 1860, six of the seven departments, comprising 183 companies, were stationed west of the Mississippi, a colonial army fighting the Indigenous occupants of the land. **In much of the western lands, the army was the primary US government institution; the military roots to institutional development run deep.**
* "President Abraham Lincoln was inaugurated in March 1861, two months after the South had seceded from the union. In April, the Confederate States of America (CSA) seized the army base at Fort Sumter near Charleston, South Carolina. 
* "Of more than a thousand US Army officers--286 left to serve the CSA. Half of these officers were West Point graduates, most of them Indian fighters, including Robert E. Lee. Three of the seven army department commanders took leadership of the Confederate Army. 
* "Based on demographics alone, the South had little chance of winning, so it is all the more remarkable that it persisted against the Union for more than four years. The 1860 population of the United States was nearly thirty-two million, with twenty-three million in the twenty-two northern states, and about nine million in the eleven southern states. 
* "More than a third of the nine million Southerners were enslaved people of African heritage. Within the CSA, 76% of settlers owned no slaves. Roughly 60-70% of those without slaves owned fewer than a hundred acres of land. 
* "Less than 1 percent owned more than a hundred slaves. Seventeen percent of settlers in the South owned one to nine slaves, and only 6.5 percent owned more than ten. Ten percent of the settlers who owned no slaves were also landless, while that many more managed to barely survive on small dirt farms. The Confederate Army reflected the same kind of percentages.
* "**Those who, even today, claim that "states' rights" caused Southern secession and the Civil War use these statistics to argue that slavery was not the cause of the Civil War, but that is false.** Every settler in the Southern states aspired to own land and slaves or to own more land and more slaves, as both social status and wealth depended on the extent of property owned. 
* "**Even small and landless farmers relied on slavery-based rule: the local slave plantation was the market for what small farmers produced, and planters hired landless settlers as overseers and sharecroppers. Most non-slave-owning settlers supported and fought for the Confederacy.**"

### Lincoln's "Free Soil" for Settlers p.134

* "Abraham Lincoln's campaign for the presidency appealed to the vote of land-poor settlers who demanded that the government 'open' Indigenous lands west of the Mississippi. **They were called *free­soilers* in reference to cheap land free of slavery.** 
* "New gold rushes and other incentives brought new waves of settlers to squat on Indigenous land. **For this reason, some Indigenous people preferred a Confederate victory,** which might divide and weaken the United States, which had grown ever more powerful. 
* "Indigenous nations in Indian Territory were more directly affected by the Civil War than anywhere else. As discussed in chapter 6, the southeastern nations--the Cherokees, Muskogees, Seminoles, Choctaws, and Chickasaws (*Five Civilized Tribes*)--were forcibly removed from their homelands during the Jackson administration, but in the Indian Territory they rebuilt their townships, farms, ranches, and institutions, including newspapers, schools, and orphanages. 
* "Although a tiny elite of each nation was wealthy and owned enslaved Africans and private estates, the majority of the people continued their collective agrarian practices. **All five nations signed treaties with the Confederacy, each for similar reasons.** Within each nation, however, there was a clear division based on class, often misleadingly expressed as a conflict between "mixed-bloods" and "full-bloods." 
* "That is, **the wealthy, assimilated, slave-owning minority that dominated politics favored the Confederacy, and the non-slave-owning poor and traditional majority wanted to stay out of the Anglo-American civil war**. Historian David Chang found that Muskogee nationalism and well-founded distrust of federal power played a major role in bringing about that nation's strategic alliance with the Confederacy. 
* "Chang writes: 
	> *Was the Creek council's alliance with the South **a racist defense of slavery and its class privileges**, or **was it a nationalist defense of Creek lands and sovereignty**? The answer has to be **both**.*
* "John Ross, principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, at first called for neutrality, but changed his mind for reasons similar to the Muskogees and asked the Cherokee council for authority to negotiate a treaty with the CSA. 
* "Nearly *seven thousand men of the five nations went into battle for the Confederacy*. Stand Watie, a Cherokee, held the post of brigadier general in the Confederate Army. His First Indian Brigade of the Army of the Trans-Mississippi ,was among the last units in the field to surrender to the Union Army on June 23, 1865, more than two months after Lee's surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia at Appomattox Courthouse in April 1865. 
* "**During the war, however, many Indigenous soldiers became disillusioned and went over to the Union forces, along with enslaved African Americans who fled to freedom.**
* "Another story is equally important, though less often told. A few months after the war broke out, some ten thousand men in Indian Territory, made up of Indigenous volunteers, along with African Americans who had freed themselves and even some Anglo-Americans, engaged in guerrilla warfare against the Confederate Army. 
* "They fought from Oklahoma into Kansas, where many of them joined unofficial Union units that had been organized by abolitionists who had trained with John Brown years earlier. **This was not likely the kind of war the Lincoln administration had desired--a multiethnic volunteer Union contingent fighting pro-slavery forces in Missouri, where enslaved Africans escaped to join the Union side.** 
* "The self-liberation by African Americans, occurring all over the South, led to Lincoln's 1863 Emancipation Proclamation, which allowed freed Africans to serve in combat.
* "**In Minnesota, which had become a non-slavery state in 1859, the Dakota Sioux were on the verge of starvation by 1862.** When they mounted an uprising to drive out the mostly German and Scandinavian settlers, Union Army troops crushed the revolt, slaughtering Dakota civilians and rounding up several hundred men. 
* "Three hundred prisoners were sentenced to death--but upon Lincoln's orders to reduce the numbers--thirty-eight were selected at random to die in the **largest mass hanging in US history**. 
* "**The revered leader Little Crow was not among those hanged, but was assassinated the following summer while out picking raspberries with his son; the assassin, a settler-farmer, collected a $500 bounty.**
* "One of the young Dakota survivors asked his uncle about the mysterious white people who would commit such crimes. The uncle replied:
	> ***Certainly they are a heartless nation.** They have made some of their people servants--yes, slaves...**The greatest object of their lives seems to be to acquire possessions--to be rich.** They desire to possess the whole world. For thirty years they were trying to entice us to sell them our land. Finally the outbreak gave them all, and we have been driven away from our beautiful country.*

### The Genocidal Army of the West p.136

* "To free the professional soldiers posted in the West to fight against the Confederate Army in the East, Lincoln called for volunteers in the West, and settlers responded, coming from Texas, Kansas, California, Washington, Oregon, Colorado, Nebraska, Utah, and Nevada. Having few Confederates to fight, *they attacked people closer to hand--Indigenous people*. 
* "Land speculators in the trans­Mississippi West sought statehood for the occupied former Mexican territories in order to attract settlers and investors. **Their eagerness to undertake the ethnic cleansing of the Indigenous residents to achieve the necessary population balance to attain statehood generated strong anti-Indian hysteria and violent actions.** Preoccupied with the Civil War in the East, the Lincoln administration did little to prevent vicious and even genocidal actions on the part of territorial authorities consisting of **volunteer Indian haters such as Kit Carson**.

#### The Sand Creek Massacre p. 137

* "**The mode of maintaining settler 'law and order' set the pattern for postwar genocide.** In the most infamous incident involving militias, the First and Third Colorado Volunteers carried out the **Sand Creek Massacre**. Although *assigned to guard the road to Santa Fe, the units mainly engaged in raiding and looting Indigenous communities*. John Chivington, an ambitious politician known as the 'Fighting Parson', led the Third Colorado.
* "By 1861, displaced and captive Cheyennes and Arapahos, under the leadership of the great peace seeker Black Kettle, were incarcerated in a US military reservation called Sand Creek, near Fort Lyon in southeastern Colorado. They camped under a white flag of truce and had federal permission to hunt buffalo to feed themselves. 
* "In early 1864, the Colorado territorial governor informed them that they could no longer leave the reservation to hunt. Despite their compliance with the order, on November 29, 1864, Chivington took seven hundred Colorado Volunteers to the reservation. Without provocation or warning, they attacked, leaving dead 105 women and children and 28 men. 
* "Even the federal commissioner of Indian affairs denounced the action, saying that the people had been 'butchered in cold blood by troops in the service of the United States'. In its 1865 investigation, the Congress Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War recorded testimonies and published a report that documented the aftermath of the killings, when Chivington and his volunteers burned tepees and stole horses. Worse, after the smoke had cleared, they had returned and finished off the few survivors while scalping and mutilating the corpses--women and men, young and old, children, babies. Then they decorated their weapons and caps with body parts--fetuses, penises, breasts, and vulvas--and, in the words of Acoma poet Simon Ortiz, 'Stuck them / on their hats to dry / Their fingers greasy / and slick'. 
* "Once back in Denver, they displayed the trophies to the adoring public in Denver's Apollo Theater and in saloons. Yet, despite the detailed report of the deeds, neither Chivington nor any of his men were reprimanded or prosecuted, signaling a free field for killing.

#### Apaches and Cochise p.138
* "US Army colonel James Carleton formed the Volunteer Army of the Pacific in 1861, based in California. In Nevada and Utah, a California businessman--Colonel Patrick Connor--commanded a militia of a thousand California volunteers that spent the war years massacring hundreds of unarmed Shoshone, Bannock, and Ute people in their encampments. Carleton led another contingent of militias to Arizona to suppress the Apaches, who were resisting colonization under the great leader Cochise. At the time, Cochise observed:
	> *When I was young I walked all over this country--east and west--and **saw no other people than the Apaches**. After many summers I walked again and found another race of people had come to take it. How is it? Why is it that the Apaches wait to die--that they carry their lives on their finger nails? The Apaches were once a great nation; they are now but few...Many have been killed in battle.*
* "Following a scorched-earth campaign against the Apaches, Carleton was promoted to the rank of brigadier general and placed in command of the Department of New Mexico. He brought in the now-seasoned killing machine of Colorado Volunteers to attack the Navajos, on whom he declared total war. He enlisted as his principal commander in the field the ubiquitous Indian killer Kit Carson.11 With unlimited authority and answering to no one, Car­ leton spent the entire Civil War in the Southwest engaged in a series of search-and-destroy missions against the Navajos. The campaign culminated in March 1864 in a three-hundred-mile forced march of eight thousand Navajo civilians to a military concentration camp at Bosque Redondo in the southeastern New Mexico desert, at the army base at Fort Sumner, an ordeal recalled in Navajo oral history as the "Long Walk." One Navajo named Herrero said,
	> *Some of the soldiers do not treat us well. When at work, if we stop a little they kick us or do something else. . . . We do not mind if an officer punishes us, but do not like to be treated badly by the soldiers. Our women sometimes come to the tents outside the fort and make contracts with the soldiers to stay with them for a night, and give them five dollars or something else. But in the morning they take away what they gave them and kick them off. This happens most every day.*
* "At least a fourth of the incarcerated died of starvation. Not until 1868 were the Navajos released and allowed to return to their home­ land in what is today the Four Corners area. This permission to re­ turn was not based on the deadly conditions of the camp, rather that Congress determined that the incarceration was too expensive to maintain.13 For these noble deeds, Carleton was appointed a major general in the US Army in 1865. Now he led the Fourth Cavalry in scorched-earth forays against Plains Indians.
* "These military campaigns against Indigenous nations constituted foreign wars fought during the US Civil War, but the end of the Civil War did not end them. They carried on unabated to the end of the century, with added killing technology and more seasoned kill­ ers, including African American cavalry units. Demobilized officers and soldiers often could not find jobs, and along with a new gen­ eration of young settlers-otherwise unemployed and often seeking violent adventure-they joined the army of the West, some of the of­ ficers accepting lower ranks in order to get career army assignments. Given that war was centered in the West and that military achieve­ ment had come to foster prestige, wealth, and political power, every West Point graduate sought to further his career by volunteering in the army. Some of their diaries echo those of combat troops in Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq, who later were troubled by the atrocities they witnessed or committed. But most soldiers persevered in their ambition to succeed.
* "Prominent Civil War generals led the army of the West, among them Generals William Tecumseh Sherman, Philip Sheridan (to whom is ascribed the statement "The only good Indian is a dead Indian"), George Armstrong Custer, and Nelson A. Miles. The army would make effective use after 1 8 65 of innovations made during the Civil War. The rapid-fire Gatling gun, first used in battle in 1862, would be employed during the rest ofthe century against Indigenous civilians. Non-technological innovations were perhaps even more important, the Civil War having fostered an extreme patriotic ideol­ ogy in the Union Army that carried over into the Indian wars. Now more centralized under presidential command, US forces relied less on state contributions and were thus less subject to their control. The prestige of the Department of War rose within the federal gov­ ernment, so that it had far more leeway to send troops to steamroll over Indigenous peoples who challenged US dominion.
* "The Union Army victory over the Confederate Army transformed the South into a quasi-captive nation, a region that remains the poorest of the United States well over a century later. The situa­ tion was similar to that in South Africa two decades later when the British defeated the Boers (descendants of the original seventeenth­ century Dutch settlers). As the British would later do with the Boers, the US government eventually allowed the defeated southern elite to return to their locally powerful positions, and both US southern­ ers and Boers soon gained national political power. The powerful white supremacist southern ruling class helped further militarize the United States, the army practically becoming a southern institu­ tion. Following the effective Reconstruction experiment to empower former slaves, the US occupying army was withdrawn, and African Americans were returned to quasi-bondage and disenfranchisement through Jim Crow laws, forming a colonized population in the South.

### Colonial Policy Precedes Military Implementation p.140
