---
title: The Origin of Capitalism
permalink: /wood-2002/
---

# [The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Origin_of_Capitalism)
* 1999 historiography of the debates surrrounding how capitalism developed. 
* Author: [Ellen Meiksins Wood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ellen_Meiksins_Wood)
* Notes based on revised 2002 edition. Verso Books' [2017 reprint](https://www.versobooks.com/books/2407-the-origin-of-capitalism) with same page numbering.

## Table of Contents
* Introduction p. 1
* Part I
	* Chapter 1: The Commercialization Model and Its Legacy p. 11
	* Chapter 2: Marxist Debates p. 34
	* Chapter 3: Marxist Alternatives p. 50
* Part II
	* Chapter 4: Commerce or Capitalism? p. 73
	* Chapter 5: The Agrarian Origin of Capitalism p. 95
* Part III
	* Chapter 6: Agrarian Capitalism and Beyond p. 125
	* Chapter 7: The Origin of Capitalist Imperialism p. 147
	* Chapter 8: Capitalism and the Nation State p. 166
	* Chapter 9: Modernity and Postmodernity p. 182
* Conclusion p. 193

### Introduction p. 1
* First edition of this book published in 1999–after [the 1997 Asian financial crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1997_Asian_financial_crisis) and default of [Russian bonds in 1998](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1998_Russian_financial_crisis). The current edition was [published in 2002](https://www.versobooks.com/books/2407-the-origin-of-capitalism)–after 9/11, the crash of the dotcom bubble, and the biggest US recession since the early 90s, possibly going back to the 1982 recession.
* The anticapitalist demonstrations (e.g., [1999 Seattle protests against the WTO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1999_Seattle_WTO_protests)) were "very clear about the conflict between the needs of people and the requirements of profit, as manifested in everything from the growing gap between rich and poor to increasing ecological destruction."
	* However, even the protesters were less specifc about whether 'globalization' and 'neoliberalism' were a more pernicious form of capitalism that could be excised from "good capitalism"; or if the problems of 1990s neoliberalism were essential and inextricable from the very nature of capitalism. 
* "But the conviction that there is and can be no alternative [to capitalism] is very deeply rooted, especially in Western culture. That conviction is supported not only by the more blatant expressions of capitalist ideology but also by some of our most cherished and unquestioned beliefs...It is as if capitalism has always been the destination of historical movement and, more than that, the movement of history itself has from the beginning been driven by capitalist 'laws of motion'." p. 2

#### Definition of capitalism p. 2-3
1. Capitalism is a system in which goods and services, down to the most basic necessities of life, are produced for profitable exchange, where even human labour-power is a commodity for sale in the market, and where all economic actors are dependent on the market.
1. This is true not only of workers, who must sell their labour-power for a wage, but also of capitalists, who depend on the market to buy their inputs, including labour-power, and to sell their output for profit.
1. Capitalism differs from other social forms because producers depend on the market for access to the means of production (unlike, for instance, peasants, who remain in direct, non-market possession of land); while appropriators cannot rely on 'extra-economic' powers of appropriation by means of direct coercion–such as the military, political, and judicial powers that enable feudal lords to extract surplus labour from peasants but must depend on the purely 'economic' mechanisms of the market. 
1. This distinct system of market depen­dence means that **the requirements of competition and­ profit maximization are the fundamental rules of life.**
1. Because of those rules, capitalism is a system uniquely driven to improve the productivity of labour by technical means. 
1. **Above all, it is a system in which the bulk of society's work is done by propertyless labourers who are obliged to sell their labour-power in exchange for a wage in order to gain access to the means of life and of labour itself.**
1. In the process of supplying the needs and wants of society, workers are at the same time and inseparably creating profits for those who buy their labour-power. 
1. In fact, the production of goods and services is subordinate to the  production of capital and capitalist profit. The basic objective of the capitalist system, in other words, is  the production and self-expansion of capital. 

#### How old is 'capitalism'? p. 3
* "This distinctive way of supplying the material needs of human beings, so very different from all preceding ways of organizing material life and social reproduction, has existed for a very short time, barely a fraction of humanity's existence on earth. 
* **Even those who most emphatically insist on the system's roots in human nature and its natural continuity with age-old human practices would not claim that it really existed before the early modern period, and then only in Western Europe.**
* They may see bits of it in earlier periods, or detect its beginnings in the Middle Ages as a looming threat to a declining  feudalism but still constrained by feudal restrictions, or they may say that it  began with the expansion of trade or with voyages of discovery–with, say, Columbus's  explorations at  the end of the fifteenth century.
* Some might call these early forms 'proto-capitalism', but few would say that the capitalist system existed in earnest before the sixteenth or seventeenth century, and some would place it as  late as the eighteenth, or perhaps even the nineteenth, when it matured into its industrial form." 

#### 'Seeds of capitalism' p. 4-6
* "[Humans behaving as rational 'economic' actors are automatically] identified with 'exchange' or 'markets'...it is here that we can detect the assumption that the *seeds of capitalism are contained in the most primitive acts of exchange, in any form of trade or market activity*.
* "That assumption is  typically connected with the other presupposition: that history has been an almost natural process of technological development. One way or another, capitalism more or less naturally appears when and where expanding markets and technological development reach the right level, allowing sufficient wealth to be accumulated so that it  can be  profitably reinvested. 
* "Many Marxist explanations are fundamentally the same–with the addition of bourgeois revolutions to help break the fetters. 
* "The effect of these explanations is to stress the *continuity* between non-capitalist and capitalist societies, and to deny or disguise the specificity of capitalism. Exchange has existed more or less forever, and it seems that the capitalist market is just more of the same. In this kind of argument, because capitalism's specific and unique need constantly to revolutionize the forces of production is just an extension and an acceleration of universal and transhistorical, almost *natural*, tendencies, industrialization is  the inevitable outcome of humanity's most basic inclinations. So the lineage of capitalism passes naturally from the earliest Babylonian merchant through the medieval burgher to the early modern bourgeois and finally to the industrial capitalist."
* "Central to these conventional accounts of history are certain assumptions, explicit or implicit, about human nature and about how human beings will behave, if only given the chance. They will, so the story goes, always avail themselves of the opportunity to maximize profit through acts of  exchange, and in order to realize that natural inclination, they will always fmd ways of improving the organization and instruments of  work in order to enhance the productivity of labour."

#### Opportunity or Imperative? p. 6
* In casual parlance, capitalism is frequently associated with the concept of opportunity. As Woods writes, "The market implies *offering* and *choice*." p. 6
* However, she also points out a contradiction between opportunities and "market forces".
* "What, then, are market *forces*? Doesn't force imply coercion? In capitalist ideology, the market implies not compulsion but freedom. At the same time, this freedom is guaranteed by certain mechanisms that ensure a 'rational economy', where supply meets demand, putting on offer commodities and services that people will freely choose. These mechanisms are the impersonal 'forces' of the market, and if they are in any way coercive, it is simply in the sense that they compel economic actors to act 'rationally' so as to maximize choice and opportunity. This implies that capitalism, the ultimate 'market society', is the optimal condition of opportunity and choice. More goods and services are on offer, more people are more free to sell and profit from them, and more people are more free to choose among and buy them."
* Woods argues that even some socialists are not explicit about the fact that "**the distinctive and dominant characteristic of the capitalist market is not opportunity or choice but, on the contrary, compulsion.** Material life and social reproduction in capitalism are universally mediated by the market, so that all individuals must in one way or another enter into market relations in order to gain access to the means of life. This unique system of ­market dependenc means that the dictates of the capitalist market– imperatives of competition,  accumulation, profit-maximization, and increasing labour-productivity–regulate not only all economic transactions but social relations in general." p. 7
* "Some readers are likely to object here that this is something every socialist, or at  least every Marxist, knows. But, as we shall see in what follows, the specificities of capitalism, like **the operation of the capitalist market as imperative rather than as opportunity**, tend to get lost even in Marxist histories of capitalism. The capitalist market as a specific social form disappears when the transition from pre-capitalist to capitalist societies is presented as a more or less natural, if often thwarted, extension or maturation of already existing social forms–at best a quantita­tive rather than a  qualitative transformation.

#### Plan for the rest of the book p. 7-8
* "My first intention is to challenge the naturalization of capitalism and to highlight the  particular ways in which it represents a historically specifIc social form and a historic rupture with earlier forms. 
* "But the purpose of this exercise is both scholarly and political. The naturalization of  capitalism, which denies its specifIcity and the long and painful historical processes that  brought it into being, limits our understanding of  the  past. At the same time, it restricts our hopes and expectations for the future, for if capitalism is the natural culmination of history, then surmounting it is unimaginable. 
* "The question of the origin of capitalism may seem arcane, but it goes to the heart of assumptions deeply rooted in our culture, widespread and dangerous illusions about the  so-called 'free' market and its benefIts to humanity, its compatibility with democracy, social justice, and ecological sustainability. Thinking about future alternatives to capitalism requires us to think about alternative conceptions of its past." p. 8 

*******


### Chapter 1: The Commercialization Model and Its Legacy p. 11
* "The most common way of explaining the origin of capitalism is to presuppose that its  development is  the natural outcome of human practices almost as old as the species  itself, which required only the removal of external obstacles that hindered its realization. This mode of explanation, or non-explanation, which has existed in many variants, constitutes what has been called the **'commercialization model'** of  economic development, and this model is arguably still the dominant one. This is  so even among its harshest critics. It is not entirely absent from the demographic explanations that claim to have displaced it, or even from most Marxist accounts." p. 11

#### Summary of the Commercialization Model p. 11-14
* "The traditional account–which appears in  classical political economy, Enlightenment conceptions of progress, and many more modern histories–is as follows. With or  without a natural inclination to *'truck, barter, and exchange'* (in Adam Smith's famous formulation), rationally self-interested individuals have been engaging in acts of  exchange since the dawn of  history. These acts became increasingly specialized with an evolving division of labour, which was also accompanied by technical improvements in the instruments of production. Improvements in productivity, in many of  these explanations, may in fact have been the primary purpose of the increasingly specialized division of labour, so that there tends to be a close connection between these accounts of commercial development and a kind of technological determinism. Capitalism, then, or 'commercial society', the highest stage of progress, represents a maturation of age-old commercial practices (together with technical advances) and their liberation from political and cultural constraints." p. 11-12
* "In these accounts [of the commercialization model], capitalism represents not so much a qualitative break from earlier forms as a massive quantitative increase: an expansion of markets and the growing commercialization of economic life." p. 12



### Chapter 4: Commerce or Capitalism?
* "The 'transition from feudalism to capitalism' is typically treated as a general European - or at least Western European - process. Yet European feudalism in Europe was internally diverse, and it produced several different outcomes, only one of which was capitalism." p. 73
* "It is not just a matter of different rates of 'combined and uneven development' or even of different transitional phases. The autonomous city-states that prospered in medieval and Renaissance Italy, for example, or the absolutist state in France, were distinct formations, each with its own internal logic of process that need not have given rise to capitalism." p. 73
#### Towns and Trade p. 74-80
#### Commerce and Basic Necessities p. 80-85
* p. 81-85 discussion of grain which was produced in the Baltic region and traded with the wealthier regions like the Netherlands which traded in luxuries. Shows how it was not competition in production like true capitalism but more about arbitrage.
* "Mercantile wealth depended precisely on the relative inaccessibility of markets and the possibility of profiting from an endless process of arbitrage between fragmented markets." p. 84
*  Conclusion of grain trade discussion p. 84-85
	* "There was, then, a  fundamental separation between consumption and production. The social conditipns in which grain was produced in the exporting regions had very little to do with the conditions in which it was consumed in the rich commercial centres. This meant, among other things, that grain was cheap by the economic standards of the consuming powers, especially  in the wealthy Dutch Republic, whose merchants and superior shipping dominated the Baltic trade, without the enhancement of productive forces in the producing regions.  Nor-did low costs in the grain-producing regions impose competitive pressures on the consuming economies that benefited from cheap imports. On the contrary, the costs of producing other commodities in those wealthy commercial economies were  in effect reduced by access to such cheap basic 'inputs' At any rate, the trading advantages of the commercial leaders did not depend primarily on competitive production but on 'extra-economic' factors such as monopoly privileges, superior shipping, sophisticated commercial practices and instruments, elaborate commercial networks, far-flung trading posts, and military might. 
	* "These disjunctions certainly meant that, while rich commercial nations may have been dependent on the grain trade for the means of survival, the cost of the most basic survival needs was disproportionately low in relation to the wealth derived from commerce in less necessary goods.  But the same disjunctions also meant that  the commercial centres whose wealth depended on them were vulnerable to the fragilities of the international trade in superfluous goods. Not only their great wealth  but  even their supply of cheap and basic necessities could suffer from declines in the luxury trade."
 
#### Florence and The Dutch Republic p. 85-94
* "Within the European trading system, there emerged several very successful and prosperous commercial centres that, according to the commercialization model, should  have been the birthplaces of capitalism. In fact, according to some versions of the model, they were indeed capitalist, though for one reason or another their further development was thwarted and they never went the whole distance to industrial capitalism, until Britain led the way. These were the so-called 'failed transitions'.
* "No one could deny that in  the great European commercial centres the wealth of the dominant classes rested on commerce, and that their appropriation of surpluses from direct producers did not  here take the classic form of feudal rent. But here too, as in other pre-capitalist societies, great wealth still depended on politically constituted property; and here too this form of appropriation shaped the particular and self-limiting course of economic development.
* "Urban patriciates or merchant elites in commercial centres in medieval and early modem Europe often extracted great wealth from commercial activities, but they relied in large part on the privileges and powers associated with their status in the city. The success of these commercial centres, as we have seen, was dependent less on competitive  production than on 'extra-economic' factors. Ruling elites in these centres depended on their civic status not only for privileged access to such extra-economic commercial advantages but typically also, as officeholders, for exploitation of domestic producers by means of direct extra-economic surplus extraction in the form of rents, dues, and taxes of one kind or another, so much so that cities of this kind have been described as collective lordships." p. 85-86
* "This is true even in cases like Florence, whose commercial wealth was based not only on trade in foreign goods but also on its own domestic products. Florence is a favourite with those preoccupied with 'failed transitions', because it was such a remarkably successful commercial power and also because of its dazzling cultural riches, as the quintessential home of the so-called 'Renaissance'. On any measure of commercial sophistication, domestic manufacture, or cultural achievement, Florence at that time far  surpassed England, yet that northern backwater was then on the verge of its capitalist development, while the opulent Italian city-state 'failed' to take that route.
* "In relation to the surrounding countryside, the city of Florence was certainly a collective lordship, exploiting peasant producers in the *contado* no less than the absolutist state in France did its own peasants. At the same time, the success of Florentine trade in its own manufactured commodities continued to depend on extra-economic factors, on monopoly privileges, or on especially sophisticated commercial and financial practices (double-entry book-keeping is supposed to have originated there), which facilitated a commerce in goods whose success in a luxury market in any case had less to do with cost-effective production than with the skills of craftsmanship. Not the least significant trait of the Florentine economy was that its greatest commercial families, notably the Medici, moved into more lucrative non-productive enterprises, such as  financial services for monarchs and popes, not to mention public office up to and including dynastic rule of the city-state itself." p. 86
* "As successful as such commercial centres were for a time, and as great as the wealth they amassed, their economic development was self-limiting. It is obviously true that the market played a central role in their development, but it seems just as clear that here it  really did function more as an opportunity than as an imperative. At least, the market did not operate here in such a way as to create the relentless capitalist drive to maximize profit by developing the forces of production.
* "It may be possible to argue (as I would be inclined to do) that the non-capitalist character of such commercial economies was as much their strength as their weakness, and that, for instance, the Italian Renaissance, which fllourished in the environment of commercial city-states in northern Italy like Florence, would not have achieved its great heights under the pressures of capitalist imperatives. But that is another story. The point  here is simply that, in the absence of those imperatives, the pattern of economic development was bound to be different.
* "Where the necessary productive capacities were present, and the market, especially for luxury goods, was available, the dominant classes were willing and able to encourage and exploit not only commerce but also production. Merchants even organized and invested in production. Yet the appropriation of great wealth still depended on extra-economic powers and privileges, and far less on developing productive forces than on refining and extending the forces of appropriation. A system of this kind would inevitably respond to declining market opportunities not by enhancing labour-productivity and improving cost-effectiveness but by squeezing producers harder or by withdrawing altogether from production in favour of more 'extra-economic' powers of appropriation.
#### The Dutch Republic during [The Golden Age](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dutch_Golden_Age) (late 1500s to late 1600s) p. 87
* "The case of the [Dutch Republic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dutch_Republic) in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries is probably the most complex. It is the case for which the strongest argument can be made as a  rival to England's claims as the first 'modem' or capitalist economy. 
* "Its commercial wealth and cultural achievements were enormous. It pioneered some of the most sophisticated commercial practices and instruments, in banking, stock trading, and financial speculation, to say nothing of its technical capacities in shipping and its military successes." p.87
* "Even its technological development in enhancing productivity for a time exceeded all others in Europe, and the English borrowed many of its agricultural advances. 
* "It had an exceptionally large urban population and seems to have been the most highly commercialized society in history, before the advent of capitalism. 
* "It was unusually dependent on trade to provide the most basic conditions of subsistence even for direct producers. More particularly, even its agricultural producers depended on trade to an unprecedented degree for basic subsistence needs, acquiring grain in the  market by selling their own commodities, in particular dairy products. 
* "There can be no doubt that the great wealth of the Republic was founded on commerce, or that Dutch commercial elites invested in domestic production–notably in agriculture–in unprecedented ways and to an unprecedented degree.
* "For these reasons, the Dutch Republic is an even greater favourite than Florence as a 'failed transition', and many explanations have been offered for the fact that the Dutch did not take the leap to industrial capitalism as the English were to do. Some have put  this down to the parasitic stranglehold of top-heavy cities, which, it is argued, eventually suppressed Dutch productivity, especially in agriculture, by squeezing it for rentier wealth.
* "Others may emphasize the ways in which the cities did invest in production, and specifically productive agriculture, yet attribute the 'failed transition' to the Republic's dependence on the export market and hence on the larger European economy, which dragged the Dutch down with it when it went into decline. Yet another explanation is  that the Dutch decline was just a typical secular downturn such as affects all 'modern' economies." p. 88
* "It could just be argued that, even when such explanations proceed from the premises of the commercialization model, they also tend to undermine it by treating the Republic's apparently *excessive* commercialization and urbanization as an obstacle to further development. But an alternative explanation might be that the Dutch 'failed' to follow the expected course of capitalist development because it was not in its essence a capitalist economy and was driven by a different economic logic.
* "It is beyond the scope of this book to enter the debate about the Dutch economy. For our purposes, it is enough to point out some of the most important ways in which its pattern of development displayed the logic of a pre-capitalist economy." p. 89
* "The Dutch may have differed from other European powers in the extent to which they relied on the market even for their basic food supplies, but **the commercial system in which they operated was still the pre-capitalist economy that characterized Europe as a whole**: 
	* "This is true not only in the sense that the Dutch were largely dependent on the European market, not least the market in luxury goods, and subject to its limitations, but also in the sense that **the Dutch economy itself was dominated not by capitalist producers but by the commercial interests ofmerchants whose principal vocation, even when they invested in agriculture or industry, was circulation** rather than production."
* "Perhaps the most important factor in the Dutch economy was **the dominance of the city and the interests of urban elites**, which also shaped the rural economy, not only as a large market for agricultural products but also as a source of investment. *The great wealth and commercial power of the Republic depended dispropotionately on its pre-eminence in international trade, conveying and marketing goods produced elsewhere.*
* "Without its leading role in international trade, and without the great wealth derived from Europe's growing luxury markets, the Dutch could not have developed either their huge urban population or, indeed, their productive agriculture. 
* **This was not so much a case in which agricultural productivity sustained an unusually large urban population (as would occur in England) but rather a case in which an unusually large urban population sustained by a dominant role in international trade, as a major link in the European commercial chain, also provided the conditions for a productive agriculture.** p. 89
* "Despite its reliance on circulating goods produced elsewhere, the Republic did trade in its own domestic commodities. During the 'Golden Age', there was a substantial connection between Dutch commercial interests and domestic production, with urban wealth ploughed into the countryside, most dramatically in massive land reclamation projects.
* "But that connection between commerce and production was, so to speak, always at one remove and subject to disruption the moment the market for Dutch products declined. **The Dutch constructed their commercial empire on the strength of other advantages outside the sphere of production.**" p. 90
* "Nor is it clear that Dutch producers, and farmers in particular, who were deeply engaged in production for the market, were subject to the competitive** imperatives** we associate with capitalism. Here, for example, the influence of low-cost grain-producing regions, which benefited the Dutch even more than other economies, if anything *reduced competitive pressures* by lowering the costs of basic inputs, allowing Dutch farmers to produce and market their own higher cost products, not basic grain but relative luxuries like dairy products and meat. The Republic owed this advantage in importing cheap inputs *to its dominance of the Baltic trade, a commercial advantage that was not based on competitive costs of production at home*.
* "Like other commercial lenders in Europe (before the dominance of capitalist Britain) , the Dutch typically relied, for their successes in international trade, on **extra-economic superiority in negotiating separate markets, rather than on competitive production in a single market**: on dominance in shipping and command of trade routes, on monopolies and trading privileges, on an elaborate network of far-flung trading posts and settlements, and on the development of sophisticated financial practices and instruments. 
* "**These 'extra-economic' advantages often relied heavily on military force**. 
	* "The rising Dutch Republic devoted much of its massive tax revenues to military expenditures, which accounted for more of the state's expenses than did any other activity. 
	* "The Dutch engaged in some notorious military exercises for purely commercial advantage, not only aggressive trade wars but also such ventures as **the seizure in 1602 of a Portuguese ship with an enormously valuable cargo of unprecedented proportions, apparently large enough to affect the future course of Dutch development**; or the 'Amboina massacre' of English merchants in the Moluccas.
* "When the European economy declined in the late seventeenth century, and the market for Dutch exports went with it, the link between conunerce and domestic production that had marked the 'Golden Age' was drastically weakened, and the Dutch fell back on their main strength, their 'commercial sophistication', together with its extra-economic supports.
* "So the Dutch–like other European economies–came up against the barriers of the old commercial system in the crisis of the seventeenth century. For all their agricultural success, and for all their trade in basic commodities, they always belonged to an economy still subject to the limitations of the pre-capitalist market, not least its disproportionate dependence on luxury consumption by the wealthy few." p. 91
* The pre-capitalist character of the Dutch economy is visible in other ways too...


### Chapter 5: The Agrarian Origin of Capitalism p. 95
* "The most salutary corrective to the naturalization of capitalism and to question-begging assumptions about its origin is the recognition that capitalism, with all its very specific drives of accumulation and profit-maximization, was born not in the city but in  the countryside, in a very specific place, and very late in human history. It required not a simple extension or expansion of barter and exchange but a complete transformation in the most basic human relations and practices, a rupture in age-old patterns of human interaction with nature.
* For millenia, there have been humans engaged in agriculture and there have been others that appropriated the fruits of the labor of others. "That division between appropriators and producers has taken many forms, but one common characteristic is that the direct producers have typically been peasants. These peasant producers have generally had direct access to the means of their own reproduction and to the land itself.
* "This has meant that when their surplus labour has been appropri­ated by exploiters, it has been done by what Marx called 'extra­-economic' means–that is, by means of direct coercion, exercised by landlords or states employing their superior force, their privileged­ access to military, judicial, and political power." p. 95-96
* Example of early modern France (the *Ancien Régime*):
	* "...production was dominated by peasant owner/occupiers, appro­priation took the classic pre-capitalist form of politically consti­tuted property, eventually giving rise not to capitalism but to the 'tax/office' structure of absolutism. Here, centralized forms of extra-economic exploitation **competed with and increasingly sup­planted older forms of seigneurial extraction**. Office became a major means of extracting surplus labour from direct producers, in the form of tax; and the state, which became a source of great private wealth, co-opted and incorporated growing numbers of appropriators from among the old nobility as well as newer 'bourgeois' officeholders." p. 96
* "Here, then, is the basic difference between all pre-capitalist societies and capitalism. It has nothing to do with whether production is urban or rural and everything to do with the particular property relations between producers and appropriators, whether in industry or agriculture. **Only in capitalism is the dominant mode of appropriation based on the complete dispossession­ of direct producers, who (unlike chattel slaves) are legally free and whose surplus labour is appropriated by purely 'econ­omic' means. Because direct producers in a fully developed capitalism are propertyless, and because their only access to the means of production, to the requirements of their own reproduc­tion, even to the means of their own labour, is the sale of their labour-power in exchange for a wage, capitalists can appropriate the workers' surplus labour without direct coercion**.
* This unique relation between producers and appropriators is, of course, mediated by *the market*. Markets of various kinds have existed throughout recorded history and no doubt before, as people have exchanged and sold their surpluses in many different ways and for many different purposes. But the market in capitalism has a distinctive, unprecedented function." p. 96
* "Virtually everything in capitalist society is a commodity produced for the market. And even more fundamentally, both capital and labour are utterly dependent on the market for the most basic conditions of their own reproduction. Just as workers depend on the market to sell their labour-power as a commodity, capitalists depend on it to buy labour-power, as well as the means of production, and to realize their profits by selling the goods or services produced by the workers. This market dependence gives the market an unprecedented role in capitalist societies, as not only a simple mechanism of exchange or distribution but **the principal determinant and regulator of social reproduction**. The emergence of the market as a determinant of sodal reproduction presupposed its penetration into the production of life's most basic necessity: food." p. 97


#### The Rise of Capitalist Property and the Ethic of 'Improvement' p. 105

#### Enclosure p. 108

#### Locke's Theory of Property p. 109
