---
title: Foundations by Brad Batesole-90 minutes overall
permalink: /foundations/
sitemap: false
---

## Outline
0. Introduction
1. The Digital Marketing Framework
2. Digital Marketing Basics
3. Digital Marketing Key Concepts
4. Digital Marketing Hub and Spokes
5. Digital Marketing and Your Website
6. Digital Marketing and Paid Channels
7. Digital Marketing with Social Media
8. Digital Marketing with Email
9. Marketing Analytics Skills
10. Conclusion

## 0. Introduction
* **What is digital marketing**
	* "When we talk about digital marketing, we're essentially talking about promoting your business online using a multitude of channels. And these channels are how you make your buyer aware of what you're selling. Common digital channels might include your website, search engines, social media, online video, and paid ads. 
	* "Your customer will intersect many digital channels in their day-to-day. And marketing is about showing up where they're at with the right message at just the right time. Now, if you're like me, when I was just starting out in marketing, you'd be asking yourself, 'Okay, but what do I say? Where do I say it? How do I know who I'm talking to and what will make them pick my brand?' 
	* "And, and, I know,  and this brings me to a key point. I want you to internalize that marketing is rarely successful on the first try. One of the greatest joys I get out of marketing is experimenting, trying new things. And evolving your marketing strategies is really key to coming out ahead. 
	* "Now, marketing is just as much a science as it is an art. And the digital aspect of marketing lets us get really scientific. We spend a lot of time experimenting, forming a hypothesis, testing it, and then using the data we collect to adjust course. **Failure is just part of the journey.** 
	* "Data and near instant access to it makes digital marketing incredibly powerful. Just about every action you take on the web is tracked.  Collect enough data points and you can build really powerful predictions about people's behavior, their interests, what they're searching for and why. 
	* "Marketing, in its simplest form, is just persuading someone to take action. The more data we have and the better we leverage it, well, the more successful that persuasion will be.
	
## 1. The Digital Marketing Framework 
* **The Building Blocks of Digital Marketing**
	* Paid Media
	* Owned Media
	* Earned Media
	* "The foundations of digital marketing start with taking a look at the three types of media that you'll leverage in your marketing efforts: paid, owned, and earned. I'll break these down for you. 
	* "When we talk about paid media, this is everything that you, well, pay for. And this includes channels like pay per click ads, affiliate marketing, and display marketing. Owned media will encompass channels that you directly control, like your website, the list of customers that you use to send out emails, and even a blog that you host. Earned media is the world of organic mentions, posts by others on social media, mentions in videos, and even articles written about you. 
	* "Now, all of these channels can overlap. Social media, for example, can be a paid channel if you're promoting your content, an owned channel if you're publishing a post, and an earned channel if you're receiving interactions and mentions from others.  
	* "Together, these make up the foundation of digital marketing. And while these media types also exist in non-digital marketing, we gain a huge advantage in the digital space, personalization. Imagine you're selling mattresses. If you used paid media in a traditional sense, you might put an ad in the local newspaper. And it's possible that someone reading the paper needs a new mattress, but most aren't shopping for it. 
	* "So you'll run this ad for a long time, and it's rather inefficient. Most eyes that land on that ad, the eyes that you're paying for, are uninterested. In digital marketing, you can identify people who are actively shopping for a mattress right now. You can pay to deliver an ad specifically to them.  And this is an incredibly efficient advertisement. 
	* "Now, there's always exceptions in marketing, but for the most part, as you evaluate where to market digitally, you'll be evaluating how to distribute your message across all three of these marketing channels.
* **The Marketing Funnel**
	* "You'll hear a lot about funnels the more time you spend in the world of marketing. Purchase funnels, sales funnels, inbound funnels, regardless of the name, they're all ultimately describing the same concept. And I want you to get in the habit of visualizing funnels as you develop your marketing strategies. 
	* "Here's how to think about a funnel. It's really just a way to represent the customer's journey as they move towards the purchase of your product or surface. At the top or the widest part of the funnel is where a buyer starts their journey. And the bottom, the narrowest part, is where you hope they end up. Your goal as a marketer is to funnel prospects into buyers, moving them from the top to the bottom of the funnel. The shape symbolizes the fact that a large number of people will never complete the journey through the funnel. You'll expose your product or service to a lot of people, but only a small fraction will actually convert. 
	* "In reality, this funnel is rather leaky, as it has holes in the sides where people will fall out. Now, the marketing funnel is typically segmented into four phases: Awareness, Interest, Desire, and Action. At the very top is Awareness. Someone has to become aware of not only what they want, but who's selling it. This is when a prospect is introduced to your brand. But they might also be introduced to the competition as well. Thus, the first hole or the exit from your funnel. Now, I know that I need a mattress, and I know that you sell one, but my initial exposure to your brand was uninteresting so I wandered off. 
	* "Now, below Awareness, we have Interest. It's at this stage that a consumer will begin to explore the products or services available to them in more detail. Now, I'm wanting to know what feature that your mattress has compared to your competitor. If I'm not captivated, well, out the funnel I go. 
	* "Next comes Desire, which we can also call Consideration. It's here that the prospect wants to make a purchase. They're in the final stages of evaluating whether or not to commit. And finally, Action. Your prospect is either going to buy or not. They may select you, someone else, or decide they're not buying at all. This is the foundational funnel. 
	* It's called **the AIDA model**. You may also see it depicted with one last step known as Loyalty, which is the act of retaining your customer. 
	* "Now, we often reference these different segments as top of the funnel, middle of the funnel, and bottom of the funnel. And this is important because how you manage your marketing will depend on where in the funnel your buyer is. Towards the bottom of the funnel, well, you have someone who is really close to making a purchase. Bottom funnel marketing focuses on identifying people who are in a buying decision and then converting them.  They're right there. At the top of the funnel, you're focused on making people aware of your solution. 
	* "You're trying to message to mostly the right people, but you know you can't be everything for everyone. But if there's zero top of the funnel marketing, well, there's nobody coming out the other side. So you have to get them in the door before you can start selling to them. 
	* "And, as you might expect, middle of the funnel marketing is the nurturing process to keep the lead moving. It's giving them a great experience, and all the information they need at just the right time to make their decision. In many ways, this is the hardest part of marketing, figuring out how to keep that person in the funnel and not spilling out. 
	* "Marketing works best when you understand which stage your customers in so you can tailor your messaging to move them to that next stage.
* **The Buyer Journey**
	* "The marketing funnel is really just a way of evaluating a buyer's journey. We understand a buyer will go through the stages from awareness to action, but is that journey ever perfectly straightforward? 
	* "The buyer may be moving up and down the funnel, exiting and reentering There's so many variables that we as marketers are working to account for. And I want to put this into perspective. Think for a minute about all of the questions you might have regarding how someone came to buy a product. Where did they find this product? Was it research in advance or did they find it on a shelf? And if they found it on a shelf, what jumped out, the price, the label?  Did they look at other products on the shelf next to it? Did they search the brand on their phone?  Did they text a picture to a friend? Was the checkout process easy? Did a coupon motivate them to buy? And so on. 
	* "I want you to try something, take out a pen and paper and write down all the steps you took when you made a recent purchase. The more you think about it, the more steps I imagine that you'll identify. And every time you go to buy something, at least in the next short future, keep a journal of your process. In fact, you can oftentimes realize that some purchases have been a brand that's been slowly chipping away at that awareness stage with you for ages. At each step, buyers are going to define their own path. So as you develop a digital marketing strategy, you'll need an idea of how a buyer will navigate your funnel. And this can feel like a rather robust undertaking. 
	* "So I want you to treat this in an agile manner, be ready to iterate on your buyer's journey. You can't conceivably map out every step, every touchpoint and every interaction. What you want to do is define the most common paths a prospective buyer will take So start by coming up with three to five answers for each of these questions. How will my buyer become aware of their problem? How might they become aware of a solution? Why would they become interested in my solution? Why would they pick my brand over another brand? What would motivate them to convert? What would be a hurdle to getting them to decide to buy? And what might they need to move down the funnel? 
	* "Understanding your customer's journey helps you to develop the right messaging for the stage that they're in. It's key to the decisions that you'll be making across all of your digital marketing.
* **Create a Buyer Journey Map**
	* "One of the greatest challenges in marketing is knowing what to say and when. And I'll let you in on a little secret: you'll never get it 100% right. But with enough time and enough iterations, you'll get it really close. But that doesn't mean your first endeavor can't or won't be incredibly effective. 
	* "So to help you land close to the target, I want you to build and maintain a buyer journey map. It is a fantastic tool for taking some of the mystery out of what a buyer needs to hear and when. Now there's no set form for this, but you can create a very simple template to get you started. Here's how I do it: I'll make a quick spreadsheet of sorts and you can do this in Excel or Google Sheets or whatever tool lets you evolve it and add to it as you go. 
	* "Along the top as column headers, I list out the funnel stages: awareness, interest, desire, action, and loyalty. Then I'll create rows for the following: activities, goals, thoughts, emotional state, touchpoints and channels, and finally, objectives. Let's go through this together. 
	* "Start with Activities. Moving left to right for each funnel stage, call out what your consumer is doing. Are they searching Google? Waiting for the bus?  Listening to music? Reading a marketing email from you? And so on. Then Goals. This is what your customer wants to achieve during this phase. This is their goal, not yours. It could be to get more information, find a discount, and so on. Next: Thoughts. What are some questions or thoughts that customer might have that correspond with that stage? Maybe they're curious about your return policy for example. Now: Emotional state. Is the customer happy, excited, sad, frustrated? Are they interested or curious? Describe how they're feeling during this portion of their journey. 
	* "I like to use a one to five scale of smiley faces and then I put a small quote that symbolizes what the customer might be feeling, such as, 'This seems interesting." Okay.  
	* "Touchpoints and channels. Where will the customer interact with your brand? Is it your website, social media, an email, a specific ad? And so on. Objectives. Here, you'll craft a few bullet points about what you need to do to move your prospective buyer to the next stage of the funnel. Now you may have multiple responses for each funnel stage, but this format will help you map out your fundamental buyer journey. The goal is to keep it simple and lean. **Don't fill out pages and pages.**  
	* "Let's fill out one column together. Let's say we have a pet grooming business and we're working on the awareness stage. For Activities, well, let's say the consumer is searching Google for 'pet groomer near me'. Goals: Well, they want to see what local businesses offer this service. For Thoughts, maybe it's 'I hope I can book this online.' And 'I've never taken Fido anywhere before'.  
	* "I'll give their Emotional State a neutral smiley face. Touchpoints: Let's say Google map listings and website. Objectives: Make the customer aware of the business, most notably, how to book an appointment and how well reviewed our business is. With this first piece of the journey built, I can move through the columns, and once I'm done, I'll have a good picture of all the marketing activities I need to complete to have a full, funnel marketing strategy. 
	* "It also helps me think through what information is most important or might even be missing from my strategy. Consider the journey that your customers experience and build a map. This way you can make the process more delightful, less frustrating, and ultimately, successful.

--------------------------

## 2. Digital Marketing Basics
* **How to develop a marketing strategy**--know your product, know your customer, know how your product solves your target customer's problem, know your differentiation counter to existing customer
* **How to define your value proposition**
	* Example of Uber. Sub bullets talked about pain points. But headline just summed it up as "The Smartest way to get around". Sub-bullets each directly address a specific pain with incumbent taxis:
		* One tap and the car comes directly to you
		* Your driver knows exactly where to go
		* Payment is completely cashless
	* Example value prop for an imaginary new smartwatch 
* How to identify your target market
	* Customer segmentation
* How to create your customer persona
	* Ficitious person as an avatar. Every customer segment should have a persona that fits on a single page.
	* Four questions about ideal customer: (1) Who are they?; (2) What needs do they have; (3) What barriers do they need to overcome?; (4) What motivates them? 
	* important to have a story and attach photo / picture
* How to establish goals for digital marketing
	* What are the attributes of a useful; actionable goal? SMART acronym
		* S = specific
		* M = measurable
		* A = attainable
		* R = relevant
		* T = time bound
	* This is where he talks about OKRs
* How to developer your digital marketing KPIs
	* granular success metrics. aka, Overall Goals are SMART. They are measured by OKRs and Key Results usually occur on the deadline per quarter. The granular metrics that roll up to OKRs are KPIs.
	* Assume that we are trying to achieve quarterly KPI Goal of selling 250 coffee mugs online. There are 2 supporting activites: (1) running online ads and (2) running email campaigns. Online ads might have a kpi of achieving $8 CPA cost per acquisition. Email campaign might have KPIs for open rate or or CTA clickthroughs
	* With online sales, likely going to look at conversion rate and CPA.
	* For broader marketing objectives, KPI for total revenue and even the ratio of new to returning visitors.
	* Make sure you make these KPIs available in a shareable document which enforces that it be easy to understand
* How to draft a one page marketing plan
	* " As your marketing strategy shapes up, you'll need a place to park all the information you're capturing. It needs to be agile, easy to update, and very simple to distribute. Now, I use a very simple, one-page template to help with this exercise. This is meant to put your problems front and center, so you can generate effective ideas. 
	* "It'll live alongside your buyer journey map and your persona documents. Here's what it looks like. You have a series of boxes that you'll fill out, and it's divided up so that the left side of the page is all about your product or service, and the right side is all about the market. Let's walk through these fields together. 
	* "In the problem box, list one to three high priority problems that your customers have, and below them, list any existing solutions that try to solve those problems. In the customer segments box, list the personas that you're targeting. From here, the solutions box is where you'll list one to three ways that your product or service solves the consumer's problems. Now, from here, you'll fill out your unique value proposition, and this is right in the middle, as it lives both between your product or service and your market. 
	* "Next, list all of your channels. This is your path to the customer, and it's how you'll communicate the existence of what you're selling, and pick the channels that your customer segments are spending the most time with. 
	* "Now...you'll need to outline your revenue streams. How are you going to make money? What's the lifetime value of your customer? What's the gross margin on whatever it is you're selling? And now, just to the left is your cost structure, and this is where you'll list the operational costs for making the business get all the way to market. How much will it cost to acquire your customer? How much does it cost to run the business? How much are you going to be spending on marketing? 
	* "Next up, key metrics. Every business must have key metrics that are used to monitor performance. List what activities you'll be measuring that are going to demonstrate that you're successful in your marketing efforts.  
	* "Finally, the unfair advantage. What do you do so insanely well that nobody can copy you, or that puts you way ahead of the competition? I want you to take 20 minutes and put together a one-page marketing plan. Now, there's a ton of resources online with editable templates if you need one. Just run a Google search for lean canvas templates, but I want you to build one at least once. It is a fantastic exercise that can help bring some clarity to the chaos that is marketing." 	

--------------------------

## 3. Digital Marketing Key Concepts
* Persuading with data
* How analytics work in digital marketing
* How to capture key insights in your digital marketing

--------------------------

## 4. Digital Marketing Hub and Spokes
* **How to outline your online marketing presence**
	* "Content sits at the core of your digital marketing strategy. Your entire online presence is built around your website, maps listings, mentions on blogs, in social media channels, through ads and emails, and well, that's all content. 
	* "But organizing and planning for the content you need can get overwhelming fast. So what you want is a blueprint of the different places where you'll be distributing content. I like to use a hub and spokes model to simplify. Now much like a bicycle wheel, this model has a hub in the middle, the most essential part, and spokes that extend out and support the wheel. 
	* "So at the core of your digital marketing strategy is your owned media. It's the content that you own and host on your platforms. Blogs are great in digital marketing, they represent a cheap and easy way to control the conversation. And you can write about your company and your team, product launches, industry developments, events you're hosting, and so on. You control the style of your writing and you can focus on the areas that you believe will appeal to your target audience. 
	* "That content in your hub is entirely under your control. You create it, you can edit it, and you manage it. That whole conversation in short is something that you own, but that message needs to get distributed. So you select your spokes and the spokes represent the digital channels you'll use to distribute that message. You'll want to select the platforms that you can actively use. 
	* "Ask yourself where your target audience hangs out and the channels that they're interacting with. Also, be sure to check where your competitors are active. Say for example, several of your spokes are social media. While you can manage your business accounts within social media, you're going to have less control over the audience that interacts with you. Social networks encourage engagement and conversation, but what you lose in control, you'll gain in amplification and reach of your message. 
	* "Now it can feel like the more spokes, the better, but remember, every spoke needs management. If you don't have the resources, it's better to stick with just a few spokes and maintain those rather than setting up your presence in many platforms and losing control over the conversation or looking as if you're no longer active. As you think through your digital marketing strategy, consider using a simple hub and spokes blueprint for your initial model. 
* **How to decide on a marketing channel**
	* "It's impossible to be active in every marketing channel. So you have to select the ones that make the most sense for your business. And in order to do that, you'll need to understand the platforms that you have access to and how they might benefit you. 
	* "Now, this is a pivotal challenge in digital marketing. There are an endless array of channels. Some are big and have been around for a while and some are smaller and maybe newer too. You have everything from the major social media outlets down to very niche forums and groups. And what's going to work for you is really highly dependent on your audience. 
	* "As a marketer, you'll need to go where your customer is but also where it makes sense to be active as a brand. Now, as you map out potential channels, I also suggest that you consider what mindset your customer is in while they're on that channel. 
	* "Let's say you sell aftermarket parts for off-roading enthusiasts. A 30-minute product demonstration on YouTube might be really effective and enjoyable for a prospect already invested in YouTube. But for a restaurant, well, YouTube is less likely to return on that same investment. 
	* "Now, it can be tempting to pursue a channel simply because it's popular but don't let yourself or stakeholders persuade you to over-invest in any channel that isn't the right fit for your consumer or what you're selling. Make an investment into exploring channels that are available to you. If they're new and foreign, well, join as an observer and follow other brands. Treat it like moving to a new town. Find a few locals to help you make the transition. Above all, invest in channels where your message lands with the right audience, where they're most likely going to be engaging with it.
* **How to prioritize in marketing**
	* "Face it, there are so many channels to choose from that it can be overwhelming to know where to start, and how to narrow down the list. 
	* "Now, marketing channels are how you distribute your message.  And your goal is to identify which marketing channels should belong on your list, and which ones you just can't accommodate. And you can't, and shouldn't be everywhere simultaneously. 
	* "So to decide which channels are worth your time, I like to use a scoring model popularized by Sean Ellis called ICE, which stands for Impact, Confidence and Ease. When you multiply these together, you'll get a score that lets you rank where to invest your time first. 
	* "Here's how it works, you'll set up a simple table with five columns. The first column will contain the marketing idea or channel. The second a score for impact. The third, a score for confidence. The fourth, ease and the fifth will be the total score. 
	* "For each idea, you're going to estimate the impact, the confidence, and the ease on a scale of 1 to 10. For impact, you're going to be asking yourself how much of an improvement will this have? In other words, how significantly will it contribute to your marketing goals? You score it 1, if it's very little impact and 10, if it's going to be a game changer. 
	* "Next, you'll need to indicate your confidence that this impact metric is as you've guessed. So how confident are you that this will have very little impact, or be that total game changer? I like to use a rule of thumb here. O means this is strictly a hunch. 1 to 2 is anecdotal, 3 to 4 means you'll have market data, 5 to 6 hard evidence, and anything over a 7 is almost a near guarantee. 
	* "From here, indicate the ease. How much time and effort will it take? O is incredibly difficult, and 10 is effortless. And from here, it's super easy. Multiply the numbers across, and then sort the ideas from the highest score to the lowest. This way, you can quickly determine which of the objectives are a priority. 
	* "This process can be incredibly helpful in getting you out of analysis paralysis and helping identify where to take immediate action.
* **How to create powerful marketing messaging**
	* "Your messaging is how a consumer comes to interact with your product or service to decide if it's right for them. Your messaging is present at every stage of the funnel, from the first visit to your website, to their decision to purchase. 
	* "Even the best products or services will fail if your messaging doesn't connect with your audience. It's really hard to change an opinion once it's been formed. So if you misstep in creating messaging, it'll be a real challenge to unwind the damage. So what you need to do is first think through your messaging strategically. 
	* "Now, one of the main attributes of strategic messaging is consistency. The best message is always simple and consistent, but also it's going to be in line with how your current customers describe what it is you do, and why you do it well. 
	* "If you're perplexed as to whether your messaging aligns with how others present you, I have a simple exercise for you. Ask your team, close customers, and even close colleagues who understand the business you're in, to send you an email with one sentence, answering the following questions. 
	* "What is it that we do? What is the problem we are solving? How are we different from our competitors? And why should customers buy from us, or why did you buy from us? Use this to find gaps in your messaging. 
	* "Then, as you go about developing any content, I want you to be sure that your messaging follows these five best practices. 
	* "**One**, tell a good, convincing story. Storytelling captures people attention and motivates them to take action, and to be convincing, well, you'll need to make sure that your product or brand comes across as trustworthy, confident, empathetic, and composed. 
	* "**Two**, appeal to emotion. People buy on emotion, and then they justify with fact. So remember to focus on outcomes that are inspirational, aspirational, or would represent a significant milestone for a person or their company.  
	* "**Three**, be consistent. Consistent messages are more memorable. Repeat a simple message over and over again, and don't change it all that much. 
	* "**Four**, be clear, avoid fancy words, and always use more conventional language when possible. 
	* "**Five**, be obvious. Don't assume that your audience understand terms that you use in your communication. Use obvious words, or define the ones that aren't obvious Be sure that your message contains a flavor of your value proposition, and use the same tone and theme across all of your marketing platforms. Understand your audience, tell a great story, and be authentic.
* **How to create lean messaging in marketing copy**
	* "If you want your messaging to be really effective and resonate with your audience, well, your marketing copy should be accessible and lean. If I were to visit your website or receive your newsletter or even see your latest Linkedln post, I shouldn't be drowning in big words. 
	* "Complex and verbose messages don't make you or your brand sounds smart. In fact, they might make you sound a little out of touch. Nobody likes to read complex jargon. Now, it's one thing to use industry terms, but it's another to string together business jargon. 
	* "Instead, give visitors something that draws them in and keeps them focused on what you have to offer. The best messaging is short, concise, and to the point.  Now, it can still be the voice of your brand, but the jargon has to go. And when it comes to accessible content, it's also important you're considering the assumptions that you're making. 
	* "You see, we make lots of decisions daily, and rarely do we ever have every answer and every piece of information available. So we rely on our gut or our intuition to guide us. Well, our intuition is built by our experiences and associations over time. And this will lead us to have preconceived notions which impact every buying decision we make. 
	* "And this is why as you craft marketing messages, you need to ask yourself what messaging assumptions have been made. **For example, many people still assume that eco-friendly cleaning products are not as effective as they're synthetic competitors. And while this is likely an incorrect theory, it's actually a widely held belief.** 
	* "The reality is, regardless of what you sell your consumers are going to make assumptions, if you don't fill in the gaps for them. So it's on you to make sure that your messaging tells the complete picture. If you know that consumers assume eco-friendly cleaning products are weaker, then you must front load the messaging that dictates they're just as strong, if not stronger. 
	* "Don't let your consumers trip over their own assumptions, but also, don't bog them down with too many complex words.

--------------------------

## 5. Digital Marketing with Your Website
* how to optimize your website
* How to use copywriting in your marketing
* How to build landing pages that convert 

--------------------------

## 6. Digital Marketing and Paid Channels
* **Introduction to paid advertising**
	* "We live in a pay to play marketing landscape. Organic reach just isn't what it used to be. So if you want to reach more people, well, you'll need to pay for the opportunity. Now, the majority of paid advertising operates in an auction format. 
	* "So, you'll identify what bidding model you're interested in, and then you'll set a price that you're willing to pay. The most common bidding model is **pay per click**.  And just as it sounds, you're deciding how much you'll pay when a user clicks on your ad. 
	* "Now, **pay per impression** is also incredibly common. In this model, you'll pay on what's known as a **CPM** basis, or cost per thousand impressions. So you'll be paying each time your ad shows up, regardless if it's clicked or not. 
	* "Now you can also pay per action or acquisition, which is a model that essentially guarantees a conversion takes place for an agreed upon price. 
	* "And in social media marketing, you can also encounter **pay per engagement**, which gives you the opportunity to pay for a like, a share, and even comments. And also within mobile app marketing, you can even **pay per install**. And then finally, video advertising is mostly based on a **pay per view** model. 
	* "And these models are used across many types of advertising. One such model is search advertising, and this is primarily bid on a cost per click, or a cost per action model. Search engines, such as Google, allow advertisers the opportunity to place text ads alongside organic search results. And Google Ads is the single most popular advertising platform. 
	* "But other search engines, such as Bing, also have platforms that allow you to reach audiences actively searching for offerings similar to yours. 
	* "Now another common paid advertising channel is display advertising. With display advertising, you'll be placing text or image advertisements on sites around the web, and within mobile applications. These banner ads can have different shapes and sizes, and you've likely encountered these as you've navigated the web yourself. Now you can target your display ads based on the content on the actual page, a website itself, or even by user attributes, such as interests or demographics. 
	* "Display is great for remarketing to visitors who didn't purchase, as well as for generating brand awareness, but it is harder to generate a direct response.  Now, most display ads are shown to a very relevant audience, but that audience may not be expressing intent, or even purchasing behavior. 
	* "Video advertising is another incredibly popular approach. In this model, you'll pay to run a short ad in a pre-roll, mid-roll, or post-roll placement. And this is referring to where your ad shows up. It's either running before the video plays, interrupting the video that's currently playing, or it'll show up at the end. And YouTube is, by far, the most popular video advertising platform. 
	* "Now, from here, we have social media marketing, and in social media marketing, you can boost your social media posts, or even advertise completely separately from your social media profile.  Now, social media ads boast some of the lowest costs, and can amplify your organic following tremendously. 
	* "Paid advertising is an important component of any marketing strategy, so you'll want to explore how it fits into your marketing goals.
* **How to identify the value of a customer**
	* "In order to invest in paid marketing, really any marketing, you'll need to understand the value of your customer. Your business has customers but they're all not created equallv. 
	* "Some customers might purchase one product and leave while others become loyal to your brand and purchase many products over the course of a year or two or even more. So, which customer is more valuable to you then? Well, of course, the second group. But you need to be measuring what's called **lifetime value** in order to know that. We call this measurement **CLV or customer lifetime value**. 
	* "Sometimes you might see this referred to as LTV. Knowing your customer lifetime value lets you know how much you can spend in advertising to acquire a customer. Now, arriving in this number can actually be relatively complicated. 
	* "So I'm going to encourage you to explore CLV calculations in more detail, but in general you can get close with the following data. You'll need your average annual purchases per customer, your average markup and the average number of years you retain a single customer. 
	* "Let's say we're selling dog toys online. So, we pull up our e-commerce data and we see that most of our customers have made two transactions over the last several years. So we can say our average annual purchases by customer is two. Then let's say that the average order across all of the orders in our store is $80. So we multiply annual purchases by average order value. In this case, 80 times two, which gives us $160. So $160 is our average revenue from a customer over the lifetime of their relationship with our storefront. But we can't calculate lifetime value on revenue, it has to be calculated on profit. 
	* "So, let's assume that our average markup is 25% and remember markup is different than margin. So in this case, that means that our cost for the $160 of goods that we sold is $128. So we're profiting $32 on the hundred and 60 dollars of revenue. So now we know that our customer lifetime value is $32. This is how much that single customer is worth to our business. And with this, well now we can start leveraging that data. We can work to try and increase that value, email marketing sales, special offers, and so on can really help move that needle. We can also try to increase the average transaction value by upselling or even recommending other products. 
	* "And we can also use this number to help identify budgets for our advertising. If a customer is worth $32 to us, well then how much are we willing to spend to acquire them? Perhaps we'd be willing to spend up to $10 to bring in that customer. So for every $10 we'd spend, we know that we'd profit $22. So now you can start running paid ads and work to optimize those to a customer acquisition cost, no greater than $10. Customer lifetime value is an important metric to have on hand and it's one that you'll use quite often in your marketing endeavors 
* **How to budget for paid marketing** 
	* "Budgeting for paid marketing is always a significant challenge with any new marketing initiative. We tend to want to make long-term plans and forecasts but often have very limited information to do so. And the reality is long-term plans are rarely accurate. 
	* "Instead, I encourage you to be comfortable taking an adaptable approach. You'll develop a forecast, and then as you collect data, you'll continue to revise your model until it's more and more accurate. Now to be honest, there's hundreds of methodologies for budgeting your paid marketing spend. 
	* "So I'm just going to give you a starting place when working within a cost-per-click model, and then you can build from here. 
	* "So let's say we run a hotel, and we're willing to pay up to $100 to get someone to book a stay. This is our target cost per acquisition. So we can't set our maximum cost per click to $100, because then we would pay up to $100 for every click, and we know that every click is not going to result in a sale. So we need to first figure out how many clicks it takes before someone will make a purchase. 
	* "To start, you can look at your current conversion rate from your online traffic. Loosely, take a look at your total number of sales from a particular channel, say direct website bookings, and then divide that by the total number of visitors for the same period. Let's say our hotel converts 8% of the traffic that visits to the website. 
	* "Now truthfully, pay-per-click advertising conversion rates are typically lower than what you'd see from direct traffic. So let's cut that number in half. We'll call it 4%. To arrive at our max cost per click, we need to take the maximum cost per acquisition and multiply it by your estimated conversion rate. In our case, that's $100 times 4%, which gives us $4 for our maximum cost per click. 
	* "Now eventually you'll get real data on how your ads perform, and you can adjust your model. But for now, you have to make loose assumptions to see if you can build a sustainable paid strategy. We do a lot of experimenting in marketing, and you have to spend some money to get that data. 
	* "When it comes to determining your overall budget, well, you'll have to evaluate how much you're comfortable spending and how many sales you need to achieve your goals. 
	* "To give you some perspective, **the average cost per acquisition with Google Search is $60**, and *a typical small business will spend between **$4,000-$9,000 per month** in paid advertising*. So don't be afraid to find a starting place, test your campaigns, and adjust your model as you scale.
* **How to create your first paid campaign**
	* "Text ads are the most popular format for paid advertising. They're the easiest way to get started and a fantastic place to experiment when you're just starting out. 
	* "Now, I want to give you some tips when creating your first campaign, just about every platform is going to have a similar hierarchy in how your advertisements will be structured. 
	* "You'll create groups of ads that are targeted to a particular set of keywords or audience attributes. And it's important that you keep these tightly themed so that your ads are highly relevant. If you're selling cases for mobile phones, you'd want to group ads by phone model versus having generic ads targeting every keyword combination of every phone model. 
	* "As you go to create your ad, well, you really need to think about how to highlight what makes you unique. What makes you stand out from the competition? Is it free shipping? Are you eco-friendly? Do you have a special patent? Let your audience know why you're competitive. What is the most motivating factor for your personas to be using your product? 
	* "Next, you always want to use a call to action. Use the description of your ad to tell people what they can do once they click. If we're advertising a hotel, we would say book now but you might also want to say call today, order now, browse, sign up, get a quote and so on. 
	* "Let people know what the next steps are and make sure that your landing page allows them to immediately take action on whatever it is you told them they could do. Also, it's a good idea to use sales terms. If you have prices, promotions, or exclusives use that information in your ad copy.  
	* "Give your customer information on how to make a decision. You might let them know that you have a limited time discount or that vou're having a 25% off sale todav onlv. You can also help pre-qualifv your traffic by adding in pricing information. If a hotel starts at $300 a night, I would include that information in the ad because that wav I know that people who can't afford it, won't be clicking. 
	* "Finally, experiment, create three to four ads for each ad group and use different messages for each to see which performs the best. Most platforms will automaticallv rotate vour ads and feature the best performing one more often, just remember that everything is an experiment. So if you're not seeing the results you're hoping for, well, keep trying new approaches and to really further your education on this topic. 
	* "I encourage you to exolore the course Google Ads Essential Training.

--------------------------

## 7. Digital Marketing with Social Media
* **First steps**
	* "At its core, social media marketing has the ability to bring a new kind of exposure and interaction to your business. For starters, social media marketing creates the opportunity to hear from your customers. Oftentimes they'll share things directly with your social channels or ask questions that might help you identify the good or bad in your business. 
	* "Now, whether you sell directly to consumers or business to business, social media has tremendous potential. Most notably, is access to real-time conversations. You as a brand can participate in discussions that are relevant to your industry. You can advance social causes or educate followers on niche, industry updates. Social media also gives you an outlet to establish credibility. Today's savvy consumers are spending more time researching brands and products before spending any money. With an active social media presence, well, you'll allow customers to indirectly advocate for you. 
	* "If they're leaving a positive comment, sharing a review or interacting with your materials it'll boost your overall credibility. You'll also begin to develop a sense of community and a community is an important tool for driving awareness to your business. As customers become advocates, they'll turn to social media to leave a compliment or they'll share what you're posting. Even if they're having an issue, your timely responses will signal to others that you have excellent support. This amplification is incredibly valuable. It's this community that will ignite your word of mouth marketing and help you reach untapped territory. Friends often look to friends for recommendations and social media allows you to activate those opportunities and expose your brand to a new audience. 
	* "And social media is fascinating. It's a rapidly evolving space that will challenge you, primarily because what works for one brand won't work for another. So as you evaluate your use of social media, you'll have to really understand your landscape, your audience, and question why your consumers would be following your social accounts. 
	* "Social media marketing is a world of its own. So I highly recommend the course, Introduction to Social Media Strategy. Now, with these guidelines in mind, don't hesitate to make your brand heard.
* **How to decide on a social media platform**
	* "It's impossible to be active in every social media channel, so you'll have to select the ones that make the most sense for your business. Now, there are many social media brands. Some are big and have been around for a while. Some are smaller and maybe newer too. 
	* "There are networks that are focused on the general audience, and then there are niche social networks or groups within a network that focus on bringing people together who have a similar interest. The social media landscape can be divided up in a few categories. 
	* "Here's a popular diagram by Fred Cavazza. He categorizes the social media platforms in networking, publishing, sharing, messaging, discussing, and collaborating. And you'll find that the most popular or biggest platforms touch on all of these aspects, so they're in the center of this diagram. 
	* "Now, different products not only serve a different purpose, but they appeal more or less to different age groups. YouTube and Facebook are used by people of almost any age group, but Snapchat, for example, sees little usage from older age groups. Linkedln sees slightly more adoption among the 30 to 49 year olds, primarily due to its specific focus on professional networking.  
	* "Not only do you have to evaluate the reach of a particular network, but you also have to consider the volatile nature of social media. New platforms rise all the time. Some gain immediate traction. Others fizzle. Some, such as TikTok, start with a niche focus and in a short window of time become prolific. It's good to keep this all in mind as you start planning your digital marketing strategy. 
	* "Joining an early network is higher risk but also higher reward. It's all reallv going to depend on vour goals. Take time to evaluate the various networks, and aim to make sure that your message lands with the right audience on a platform where thev'll most likelv be paving attention to it.
* **How to build and leverage followers**
	* "Social media isn't very social if you're lacking followers. And when you're starting out, the early traction can be really challenging. So I encourage you, start small, and close to home. Once you've set up your social media accounts, then invite colleagues, coworkers, friends, and those in your extended network to start following your brand. 
	* "Next, make sure to include your social media links in all of your own media, start with your website and your blog, but you can also include links in your emails or newsletters. Then, focus on posting valuable content. 
	* "If you post content people can use or are interested in, then chances are, they'll share it. And the wider your content gets shared, the higher the chances that you'll pick up some new followers. Now, from here, really consider using hashtags in your posts. Hashtags are a way to classify content online. Anyone can create a hashtag to refer to a specific content or topic. And by using the hashtag, will you indicate the relation of your content to that specific topic. And hashtags are searchable on several networks, and with many networks, people can even follow hashtags. So they'll see content related to that tag appearing in their feed. 
	* "It's also a great idea to include popular or trending hashtags, to get exposure to people who are not in your immediate network. And then, they might even become your followers. On many networks, you can also use @mentions in your post. An @mention will call out another platform user. 
	* "And by doing this, that user then gets alerted to your post and it gives them a chance to consider resharing it if they find it relevant.  It can also get you exposure to a whole new group of potential followers. Imagine you own a coffee shop. You could post a picture that includes an awesome assortment of fresh pastries with the caption, what's better than fresh pastries from @localbakery alongside your morning coffee? 
	* "Another way to grow your followers is to rely on an influencer. A post from an influencer could give you a lot of exposure. However, this typically doesn't come for free. If you're interested in getting help from an influencer, tools like Socialbaker or Tagger can help you find the right fit for the audience you're targeting. 
	* "Finally, you can create an advertising campaign to help you generate awareness and followers for your business. Now, one piece of advice here, you want followers who have a genuine interest in your brand. So make sure that your ad campaign is focused on building authentic followers.  
	* "Now, there are a ton of tools out there that can help you advance your following, so I encourage you to learn more about them. You can explore the course, Marketing Tools: Social Media. Now you don't build a following overnight, but if you follow these steps, you'll find that your audience can grow, well, faster than you think.

--------------------------

## 8. Digital Marketing with Email
* The power of email marketing
* How to develop an email marketing plan
* How to measure the success of email
* How to launch successful campaigns: Email tools

--------------------------

## 9. Marketing Analytics Skills
* How to decide what to track with marketing analytics
* How to generate reports for marketing analytics

--------------------------

## 10. Conclusion
* How to continually build digital marketing skills

--------------------------

# Appendix from [Longer 2 hour course from 2021](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/digital-marketing-foundations-2021/what-is-digital-marketing?)

### 10. Digital Marketing with Video
* [**The impact of video marketing**](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/digital-marketing-foundations-2021/the-impact-of-video-marketing?)
	* "Video marketing is almost a must with any digital marketing effort. This involves producing prerecorded or even live video content and distributing it through platforms like YouTube, Linkedin, Twitter, and your website. 
	* "You may even leverage influencers to secure mentions and product reviews in videos that they already create within your target audience. Video marketing can be used to show off your location, your products, or even help customers through their buying decision. You might make a video to tell your brand story, to chronicle the work you're doing, share quick updates, discuss your industry, showcase your product, or to educate and inspire. 
	* "Now it's easy to get caught up in the idea of creating a viral video, but going viral isn't a viable or necessary strategy. **Instead, focus on crafting content that your audience will enjoy.** You can still gain tremendous value out of video marketing, even without generating millions of views. 
	* "Now, according to data from HubSpot research, **more than half of consumers want to see videos from brands**. Not only do your consumers want video, but it'll work to increase your conversion rates, both on landing pages, and even in your email outreach. These days, consumers use video as a way to make a buying decision. So regardless of your industry, video can play a key role in your digital marketing strategy.
* ** Getting started with video marketing**
	* "Not all video content is created equal. If you decide to pursue video marketing, well, you'll want to focus on building high quality, and highly targeted material. Much like your website. 
	* "**Viewers decide whether they'll keep watching your video within the first few seconds.** So you not only need to retain their attention throughout your video, but you need to make sure the first moments are captivating. 
	* "Your content should speak directly to your audience and you'll need to experiment with new approaches and new styles until you find what resonates. Some of the best content answers questions your target audience is already asking. So as you create your videos, avoid building a sales pitch, and instead share the unique aspects of your product or service that can't be told with text or pictures. 
	* "What makes you unique? What are you proud of? What do you highlight when you share your business offerings with others? All great questions to be asking. As you create your videos, I want you to keep the following in mind. **Your videos should be short, less than two minutes is an ideal starting point. But for some social platforms, 30 to 45 seconds is as long as you'll want.** 
	* "And when you go to create your content, be sure to use a high quality camera, your phone likely shoots high enough quality video these days. And with the immense popularity of video marketing, you're able to find stabilizers and lighting kits. That'll work directly with your phone. Now, when you're creating videos talk directly to your audience and keep it natural, slightly informal and personal. 
	* "The values of your brand, your tone, and your visual style should all be evident in your content. And keep your future videos consistent. So as not to create confusion when users watch more and more of your material. Now, **most viewers are only going to make it through about 70% of your video and that's even pushing it**. *So the shorter your video the better the likelihood users watch it to the end.* But be sure to include a call to action in the middle of your content, and again, towards the end, and then leverage any annotations to make that messaging interactive. 
	* "If you're strapped for ideas, consider reaching out to an agency that specializes in building video content. And if you're doing it yourself we'll consider renting quality lights and video equipment from a company like borrowlenses.com or lensrentals.com. 
	* "As you look for ideas, ask yourself these questions, could I create content related to my industry that helps people learn something? Can I educate viewers on different ways to use my product? Using educational video content is an excellent way to build brand authority, and generate awareness, for whatever you're selling. 
	* "You can also ask, what's the benefit people will get from using my product, and how can I showcase that? Videos that answer what if or frequently asked questions work well to generate interest. For more details and best practices, I would definitely check out the [YouTube Creator Academy](https://www.youtube.com/user/creatoracademy). See also [this article](https://www.netinfluencer.com/youtube-creator-academy/). You can't go wrong expanding your skills in video marketing."
